Handed Down, Experienced, and Reflected
(including my first 23 years)

Table of Contents

1. Introduction ................................................... 2
2. The Grandparents ............................................... 3
3. The Parents .................................................... 5
4. Berlin: The Apartment at Reichsstraße 9 ........................ 9
5. Early Years in Berlin ......................................... 11
6. Königstein: The Grandparents' House at Ölmühlweg 33, Corner of
Grüner Weg ....................................................... 15
7. Frankfurt: The Bank, Neue Mainzer Straße 32 ................... 17
8. Life in Berlin and Travels from There ......................... 19
9. Christmas and New Year's Eve in Frankfurt ..................... 25
10. The Time in Berlin Approaches Its End ........................ 28
11. Giving Names ................................................. 32
12. Many Years of Summer Idyll in Königstein ..................... 33
13. 1932 - From Berlin to Freiburg ............................... 40
14. The House at Wintererstraße 69 ............................... 42
15. ... and Its Surroundings ..................................... 44
16. Settling In and Perspectives ................................. 45
17. Opa's Birthday and Politics .................................. 48
18. Life in Freiburg - Initially ................................. 51
19. The New Germany Casts Its First Shadows ...................... 56
20. Adolf and Elisabeth, the Wedding ............................. 59
21. Zipfel & Co. - A Chapter of Its Own .......................... 61
22. A Life Between Normalcy and Growing Unease ................... 64
23. All Well and Good, but Gathering Clouds ...................... 68
24. The Pressure Increases and Escalates ......................... 71
25. 1938 and 1939 in Freiburg .................................... 75
26. Beginning of the War and Abitur .............................. 81
27. Laborer and Mechanic's Apprentice ............................ 84
28. Transition to a Real Professional Life with the Expanding
War in the Background (1940 and 1941) ............................ 88
29. Life During the War 1942/43 .................................. 94
30. Total War .................................................... 99
31. The Last Months Until the End of the War - Exciting and Turbu-
lent ............................................................ 103
32. Conclusion .................................................. 108
33. A Topic that Stands Alone: "Who Is a Jew?" .................. 110


1. Introduction

The computer is here. It was the prerequisite for me to begin writing. And I'm already getting along quite well with it. It's November 1989.

Why I want to write about what my thoughts can still catch from my personal past and that of my parents and grandparents has multiple causes. The first impulse came from the children. They want to know so much, and I can only tell them some things without falling into deep contemplation and thereby becoming tedious to listen to. But everything in me urges to convey as much as possible to them.

Quite important for the decision to sit down and write is the fact that I myself know so little about my parents and grandparents. From today's perspective, it's inconceivable that I didn't ask more, much more about what was. Did I ask at all? This is an extremely pressing question, and the further question that goes with it is: Why was it so? Was there a lack of closeness? Was the word "closeness" ever used? Was this a phenomenon only of our family or was it like this everywhere? I think it was a phenomenon of earlier times, and not only of those generations but also of the generations before. Today's openness and closeness have certainly only developed in the last 20 to 30 years. - Be that as it may, my desire to express myself as thoroughly as possible has its causal core here.

There's more to it. After all, following a completely carefree childhood, I spent my youth in an unusual, frightening time. It was full of inconsistencies that influenced my life. What has remained of it? How has it remained? One thing I know for certain: although it was several decades ago, it's still very close in my thoughts.

Remembering, what is that? It's multi-layered to begin with. Memories of personal experiences unite and mix with what has remained from stories told, and with impressions conveyed through photos, letters, or other means. I don't want to - and moreover can't - separate one from the other, but I think there should be indications from case to case about which of these sources what I want to record here flows from. It's amazing, by the way, what documents, photocopies, and other items from the time of my parents and grandparents still exist. I'm very grateful to my parents for having kept so much and such important things. I've read through them with burning ears and - yes - with a burning heart. And I want to quote from them as well. This will bring many things to life.

Bismarck wrote "Thoughts and Memories". So that title is already taken. It would have fit well. Many times I've thought about other titles and whether there should be a title at all. Two appealed to me the most: "Remembrance and Reflections" and "Handed Down, Lived, and Remembered". I've decided on the latter.

One more note seems important to me. It's possible that some things I briefly mentioned in the chapters "The Grandparents" and "The Parents" will be told again later. I've accepted that.

And one more thing. I won't be historically completely accurate. For example, I'll speak of "Germany" when perhaps it should be "German Reich". But I believe such things can be accepted as well. After all, I don't want to write a historical treatise, but rather what comes to mind. One thing I already know now: something new will always occur to me when a chapter is actually already finished. It was precisely for this reason that a computer had to be here before I was ready to start. And that's exactly what I want to do now!


2. The Grandparents

I experienced my mother's parents very consciously; of my father's parents, only the mother was still alive when I was born. These three will therefore appear in the further course of my report.

My mother Martha's parents were Dr. Albert Katzenellenbogen (Opa) born 15.1.1863 and Cornelie, née Doctor (Öms) born 11.11.70. Opa came from an old Jewish family that got its name from the small German town of Katzenellenbogen, where in the Middle Ages the noble family of the same name residing there had given some Jews the right to live. The Jewish family of this name can be traced back to the 15th century. However, they did not remain living in this place. It would go too far to list the many changes of location for which there are documents. Opa was born in Krotoschin (in the then province of Posen, today Poland), then came to Germany where he studied law. It was said that he was quite a militant student, a member of a Jewish dueling fraternity and generally very athletic. He came to Frankfurt as a lawyer and married Öms there on 17.11.1890. The couple had three children: Grete, Martha and Adolf. Opa became legal counsel of the Mitteldeutsche Creditbank in 1885, joined the board in 1903, where he remained until 1929. He then received a seat on the supervisory board of Commerz- und Privatbank, which had merged with Mitteldeutsche Creditbank. In 1929 he held 23 supervisory board mandates, and since 1912 he was "Justizrat" (honorary title for distinguished lawyers). Opa was what one would call a "liberal" Jew. I have been asked many times which Jewish holiday or which Jewish ritual I experienced in the family where we were guests countless times. I can't remember a single one. This is probably also explained by the fact that although Öms came from an old Jewish Frankfurt family (her father was a banker), she was baptized Protestant. The couple also had their three children baptized soon after birth. "Jew" or "Jewish", these terms were, as far as I remember, never a topic in the family, at least not in front of us children. Certainly not because it was perceived as a flaw. No, it was simply normality.

Opa had numerous siblings. But they don't exist in my memory. When the extended Katzenellenbogen/Doctor family and their in-laws along with their children met at Opa and Öms' - and as mentioned, this was very often - there was never any of Opa's siblings present. Perhaps they lived too far away, perhaps the relationship was not close. I don't know. The relationship with his cousins and their relatives was closer. In Berlin there were the brothers Fritz and Ludwig (called Lutz), in Brandenburg the landowner Manfred (Fredi) Katzenellenbogen.

Of Öms' siblings, her brother Professor Dr. Alfred Doren and his wife Anna née Pietsch definitely belonged to the extended family. They lived in Leipzig. Their marriage was childless. After his doctorate, Alfred had changed his name from "Doctor" to "Doren". Understandable, otherwise he would have been called Dr. Doctor! Surely Anna, a sister of Öms, had also belonged to the extended family earlier. But she died already in 1929 and has probably therefore escaped my memory. Her son Rudolf Flörsheim (Uncle Rudi) and his wife Maria, née Koch from a wealthy Baden-Baden jeweler family (Aunt Mariechen) were often at Opa and Öms'.

The gatherings, which were not infrequently days or even weeks of living together, took place either in Frankfurt in the huge official apartment of Commerzbank (formerly Mitteldeutsche Kreditbank) Neue Mainzer Str.32) or in Königstein (Ölmühlweg 33). Some of the very valuable furniture is still preserved and is also in our home, such as the large Frankfurt Baroque cabinet in the living room.

Öms was the soul of the extended family. She worked in the background, but was always present. She sovereignly managed the large household with cook and maid, all of whom felt closely connected to the family. Öms died on 21.6.41 from the late effects of a stroke that had largely paralyzed her and robbed her of speech years before. Opa was "deported" by the Nazis on 18.8.1942. His trace is lost in Auschwitz... Everyone knows what that means.

The parents of my father Alfred Friedrich were the printer Eduard Maurer (born 27.4.1844) and Marie, née Weyrich (born 8.5.1853), whom we called "Oma". Eduard Maurer came from St. Wendel, where his father and grandfather were also printers. Marie Weyrich was the daughter of the mayor of Niederheimbach on the Rhine. The wedding was on 2.7.1875. Even before that, Eduard Maurer had moved to Saargemünd, where he founded a German newspaper. There still exists the "Concession Document" that allows him "to operate the printing trade in Saargemünd", issued in Strasbourg and dated 17.11.1874. There is also a purchase contract dated April 5, 1882 for a property in Saargemünd. Likewise, a contract "for the construction of residential houses for Mr. Printing Press Owner Maurer" dated April 1, 1882. The establishment of a German newspaper in Saargemünd was related to Germany's victory over France after the war of 1870/71. France had to cede Alsace-Lorraine to the German Reich. Eduard was probably, like the entire German people, carried away by the victory over the "hereditary enemy" France - as it was called and was on everyone's lips at the time -, by the founding of the German Reich and the proclamation of the King of Prussia as German Emperor. Be that as it may, the property purchase and building project were certainly only undertaken after the newspaper was established and enough money was available. It can be assumed that the family had come to good prosperity. Beautiful crystal glasses for various purposes with the initials E. M. and also remnants of valuable tableware still exist today. They stand or lie in our aforementioned Frankfurt Baroque cabinet. The publisher of the new German newspaper must have been among the notables in the small town of Saargemünd. He and his wife must have had to represent from time to time. It is interesting that the glasses and tableware did not contain the wife's first initial - M - in the monogram, but the husband's - E. On the silver cutlery, however, as can still be seen on individual pieces, the monogram MM is found.

Eduard died early, on June 22, 1890. The pastor's eulogy and a letter of condolence still exist. Eduard left behind his widow with three sons: Eugen, Kurt and Alfred. Oma remained in Saargemünd until her eldest son Eugen, now married, had settled in Strasbourg as a lawyer. She had to leave Strasbourg in 1919 after the end of World War I together with Eugen and his wife, because Alsace-Lorraine returned to France, and all those who had "distinguished" themselves through particular Germanness were expelled from the country. They were also put on a special list and were not allowed to enter France later. Oma moved to Berlin to her son Kurt, who, now married, lived there as a lawyer. In 1932 she came to Freiburg with my parents and me. Our house there had been completed in September. Oma died in 1939 shortly after the beginning of World War II in Bad Homburg, where she was visiting her son Eugen. She also spent many weeks with Opa and Öms in Frankfurt, where she was so much planned as a "family member" that there was a special room for her.


3. The Parents

My father Alfred Friedrich Maurer was born on 18.11.81 in Saargemünd as the youngest of three sons of the married couple Eduard and Marie Maurer. I have no records of the eldest, Eugen's, birth date; I estimate 1876 or 1877. Kurt, the middle one, was born on 5.8.79. Father Eduard died early (1890), and Mother Marie (Oma) must have been quite overwhelmed with raising them. In stories, a cane behind the door was mentioned, which was used when necessary. Kurt was a rascal (and remained so), full of foolish pranks. And Alfred was no melancholy child either. Eugen, on the other hand, always good and diligent, proved to be a help and support to his mother and probably had his hands full with that.

Only one incident shall be reported here. Alfred was not admitted to the Abitur due to "moral immaturity". He was by far the youngest in his class. Was it because of this or for other reasons? He always said it was because of this! So he had to repeat the Oberprima. In the small town of Saargemünd, the classes were also small, especially the upper ones. For at that time, the requirements for students at Gymnasiums were high. So the Oberprima, I believe, had only five students. Three failed the Abitur. Of the two who passed, Alfred was the best. Dry comment from brother Eugen, by then a law student: "You are the donkey with the longer ears among two donkeys!"

Eugen and Kurt became lawyers, Alfred became a soldier and joined the 2nd Baden Field Artillery Regiment No. 30 in Rastatt. On 16.2.01 he received his ensign's patent, on 18.10.01 his lieutenant's patent. Both documents have survived. The wording illustrates the time and shall therefore be reproduced here in full. "Patent as Lieutenant of Field Artillery for the former Ensign Maurer. After His Royal Majesty of Prussia, our most gracious King and Lord, has resolved to appoint and commission in grace the Ensign in the 2nd Baden Field Artillery Regiment No. 30 Alfred Maurer as Lieutenant of Field Artillery, His Majesty does so hereby and by virtue of this patent in such a way that he shall continue to be faithful, loyal and obedient to His Royal Majesty and His Royal House, duly perform his charge, diligently and faithfully execute what he is to do and perform by day and by night, on land and on water, conduct himself bravely and irreproachably in all occurring war events, as is in accordance with his oath of duty, but otherwise also enjoy all prerogatives and rights associated with this charge. In witness whereof, His Majesty has had this patent impressed with His seal and authorized. So done and given: New Palace, October 18, 1901."

However, his military career was only of very short duration and ended already in 1907, as the sciatic nerve tore while riding. According to the medical standards of the time, this meant incapacity for service. In fact, he suffered from severe sciatica for the rest of his life.

Surely the abrupt end of his military life was a bitter blow. Among the stories from his life, those from his military time were the most frequent. I have retained only a few. Among these, however, one shall be told. Lieutenant Maurer returned to Rastatt from a detachment and met his commander on the street. "Well, Maurer, back already?" - Answer: "No, Colonel, I'm not coming back until the day after tomorrow!" That was indeed an incredible cheek! It was then punished accordingly. Lieutenant Maurer had to report in full uniform (original tone: "...buckled up with bandolier and sash...") and apologize.

He was a soldier with heart and soul and probably remained so in the depths of his heart. But he was pensioned off in 1907 and received commercial training at the Hamburg coffee company Sielcken. He lived at Mundsburger Damm 21, as shown by the "leave certificate for the Lieutenant of the Landwehr Field Artillery I. Levy" dated 25.2.08. (The addition "of the Landwehr" is the reference to his retirement status.) The leave certificate is also the indication that he went to the USA for two years, April 1908 to March 1910. As far as I know, Sielcken sent him there. The name "Sielcken" is familiar to me from stories.

From then on, there are initially no documents or references about the following years. He was in London for a longer time and also told stories about it. It was probably a kind of "heyday" for him. A postcard from 1911 could serve as an indication. It was posted in London and addressed to "Fred Maurer Esq., 35, St. James's Place, London W." On the picture side, eight women are drawn hurrying to Piccadilly, along with the text "Maurer is coming". He was probably quite a charmer and let this show through in his stories. In his apartment, he must have virtually "held court", for in stories there was also mention of at least a temporary servant. Professionally, he moved to the Austrian company Böhler-Stahl in Vienna, which among other things produced weapons. He had met and befriended one of the owners, Walter Böhler, in New York or London. For Böhler, he sold the cannons produced there throughout Europe, perhaps even worldwide. As a former artilleryman and fluent in English and French, he was certainly well suited for this.

When World War I broke out in 1914, he was in Vienna. His pronounced sense of nationalism made him return to Germany and volunteer for war service. Despite his disability, he was accepted and deployed on the Western Front before Ypres. Soon, however, war deployment was no longer possible for health reasons. A period in the military administration of occupied Belgium followed. At the end of the war (November 1918), he was with the Flak (anti-aircraft defense) in Frankfurt.

The Katzenellenbogen family lived in Frankfurt. The Maurer and Katzenellenbogen families had met years before in what was then called "summer retreat" in the Northern Black Forest and got along well. This must have been around 1907. What could be more natural than to renew contacts now, and the contacts apparently deepened very quickly. The little girl Martha Katzenellenbogen had become a beautiful young woman, as photos prove. Alfred must have quickly fallen in love, and Martha no less, for at Christmas 1919, the Katzenellenbogen parents announced the engagement. The announcement still exists. So does the table and menu card of the wedding on 20.5.20 issued to "Mr. Alfred F. Maurer". There was meat broth; Rhine salmon; saddle of venison, saddle of veal, vegetables; ice cream. The marriage ceremony the day before had been performed by Pastor Urspruch, who had baptized and confirmed the Katzenellenbogen children.

My mother Martha Sofie Anna Katzenellenbogen was born on 21.7.1897 in Frankfurt am Main as the 2nd child of the married couple Dr. Albert and Cornelie Katzenellenbogen. Her older sister was Grete, born 2.10.1893, her younger brother Adolf, born 1901. Amusingly, her first name was entered as "Marta" in the birth register, which unsettled her greatly throughout her life, as she felt that Martha should be written with "th". She mostly did this, but always with a guilty conscience and as if she were acting against the law.

Her childhood and that of her siblings was carefree and happy. Photographs also testify to this. The father was a well-earning banker, highly respected not only in Frankfurt. The mother came from an old Frankfurt family. There was a large circle of friends. The house was always open to friends and, of course, relatives. Most memories are connected with Königstein, where the family had built a large summer house. The family spent several months of the year there. It was an idyll for everyone.

Martha attended the Private Lyceum Schmidt, where the daughters of well-known and wealthy Frankfurt families met. Friendships formed there often lasted a lifetime. Even in old age, one was still "a child from my class". Her school time ended on 26.3.14. The school certificate still exists. This was followed by piano training at the Frankfurt Conservatory. The musical interest was there, as was the inclination. But certainly, the fact that this was undertaken as part of the education of a "young lady of good family" also played a role. I don't know how long the piano training could be continued during World War I, which broke out just 5 months after school graduation. Certainly not for very long, as the consequences of the war became increasingly severe and the duty to engage in war aid service grew. An indication of this is the still existing certificate of participation in a "course for war helpers in kindergartens and after-school care centers" (29.1.-31.3.17). From stories, it appears that she ran an after-school care center. This involved not only supervision during games and the like. The war-related duties were far more pressing. The long war without adequate provision of everything needed for life had led to severe shortages. Beechnuts and other local fruits possible for supply had to be collected in forests and fields. The winters were the worst. At the end of the war in 1918, these activities certainly had to be continued. But now she had met and fallen in love with Alfred. A still existing letter testifies to this. As already mentioned, the wedding followed in May 1920.

Certainly favored by Opa's connections, Alfred was able to establish a new economic existence in the form of a grain company in Berlin with an office on Schiffbauerdamm. The main buyer of the grain he sold was the Berlin brewery Schultheiß-Patzenhofer, in which Opa's cousin Lutz Katzenellenbogen held a significant position. I don't know exactly when the couple moved to Berlin. It is certain that their first apartment was at Reichsstraße 105 in Berlin-Westend and that due to the inflation at the time, acquiring the trousseau caused huge problems. In July 1922, I came into the world. But that is the beginning of a new chapter.

Still belonging to this chapter is further information about Alfred's and Martha's siblings. Eugen Maurer (Uncle Eugen) married Anna (maiden name unfortunately no longer remembered). The marriage remained childless. After being expelled from Strasbourg in 1919, the couple moved to Frankfurt, where Eugen established himself as a lawyer, but with little success. His pronounced sense of justice forbade him from taking on mandates of whose justice he was not 150% convinced. Opa then brought him to the Mitteldeutsche Creditbank as a syndic. It must have been a tough period of familiarization at first, but then a wonderful relationship of trust developed with Opa. Eugen remained at the bank until his early retirement due to angina pectoris. He died before the total bombing in 1944, which Aunt Anna survived. She moved to Bad Homburg and died there at a very old age on 8.1.65.

Kurt Maurer (Uncle Kurt) was childlessly married to Franziska, née Ullricy (Aunt Fränzel). He settled as a lawyer in Berlin, became a syndic of the film company Ufa and then a lawyer again. Aunt Fränzel died on 9.6.65 at the age of 83; Uncle Kurt on 6.7.67 at the age of 88.

Grete Katzenellenbogen (Aunt Gretel) married Lieutenant Kurt Reichert in 1913, who fell in France shortly after the outbreak of war in September 1914. Shortly before, in July 1914, their son Rolf was born. In her second marriage, she married the lawyer Dr. Erich Berndt (Uncle Erich). The marriage had one son, Dieter. Aunt Gretel died on 22.3.44 from an American bomb, Uncle Erich on 28.5.65 from the consequences of a stroke.

Adolf Katzenellenbogen (Uncle Adolf) was forced by his father to study law and passed both state exams. On the side, he secretly studied his beloved art history. Opa finally agreed to this career path, and Adolf received his doctorate in 1933 in Hamburg under the famous Professor Panofsky. He married in 1935 the promising Swiss pianist Elisabeth Holzheu, whom he had met at his uncle Alfred Doren's in Leipzig. The marriage produced 2 children: Ruth, born in Konstanz, where the couple had their first domicile, and John, born in the USA, where the couple later emigrated. Uncle Adolf died in 1964 from the late effects of an illness he had contracted in the Dachau concentration camp. He had been taken there on 9.11.38 but was later released. Aunt Elisabeth died in 1988 from the consequences of Alzheimer's disease.


4. Berlin: The Apartment at Reichsstraße 9

I was born on July 3, 1922, in Berlin as Peter Eugen Adolf ("Peter" plus an Uncle Maurer plus an Uncle Katzenellenbogen). However, the birth certificate doesn't say "Berlin" but "Charlottenburg". Charlottenburg is a district of Berlin.

So, Reichsstraße is located in Berlin-Charlottenburg or, to put it even more "elegantly", in Berlin-Westend. Kaiserdamm meets Reichskanzlerplatz and continues from there as two streets: Heerstraße and Reichsstraße. Just to the left on Reichsstraße is house number 105. That was the parents' very first apartment, and that's where - or in a clinic? - I was born. But very soon we moved to Reichsstraße 9, corner of Leistikowstraße. That was about 200 meters further, but on the right side.

We stayed in this apartment until we moved to Freiburg i.Br. in September 1932, so 9 to 10 years, and I still remember it very clearly. The house was a corner building, with a small private school on the ground floor. It was a typical Berlin apartment building, probably built in the early years of the 20th century. It was considered "lordly" by the standards of the time, and it will soon become clear why. To get in downstairs without a key, you had to ring the bell. Not just any bell with "Maurer" written on it. No, the bell was in the middle of a large round, always polished brass plate. The polishing was done by the porter's wife or her husband. She - or sometimes her husband - sat in a small cubbyhole just to the left of the front door, the so-called porter's lodge. You could only enter when the electric opening button was pressed in the porter's lodge. Arrivals - even those with their own key - were critically eyed by the porter's wife, and it happened that she would send you back out to clean your shoes better. For she feared for the red runner that led across the foyer to the elevator. The porter's wife could afford such behavior because she had an enormous volume. Her husband, on the other hand, was only half or even a quarter of a portion and lost himself behind her back. The elevator then took you up to the 3rd floor in front of Maurers' apartment door.

You entered the apartment and found yourself in a quite wide hallway. Immediately to the right was the children's room. It was spacious and in the early years had a second bed for the nanny in addition to the child's bed. The window was barred with iron rods, not close together, but barred nonetheless. This was probably part of the concept of a children's room. After all, we were on the 3rd floor. I never felt this as a confinement, by the way.

The second room on the right was the "gentlemen's room" and furnished accordingly. I can hardly remember any details, only a specially made large armchair covered with dark brown corduroy. The carpet might have been red.

The hallway then had a small branch to the left. There it led to the toilet and to a window to the courtyard, which, as will be shown later, deserves mention. But straight ahead you came to the room typical for Berlin apartments and therefore called the "Berlin room". It was located in every apartment between the living and sleeping areas. In our apartment, it was very large and served as the dining room. While at the end on the left it continued into the sleeping area, on the right side there was a wide double sliding door that could be opened wide, revealing the view and path to the "Biedermeier room". This is where the family's furniture treasures were, and this is where most of the living took place. This is also where we entertained guests. On the street side, the Biedermeier room had a conservatory in front of it. Not large, but big enough to have space for indoor linden trees and the like.

The door to the sleeping area opened onto a narrow corridor. On the left, first the parents' bedroom, then the bathroom and the cook's room. At the end of the corridor straight ahead, you came to the kitchen. This was no longer part of the sleeping area, but belonged to the cook's domain. But that wasn't all. The kitchen also had an apartment door. It led to the rear building. This was the suppliers' entrance, and the staircase behind it was the suppliers' staircase. If you went down this staircase, you came to the door to the courtyard, whose exit led to Leistikowstraße.

Speaking of the "courtyard". The house was, as mentioned, a corner house and built in typical Berlin fashion around a gloomy inner courtyard, which among other things contained the garbage cans. Since unobserved by watchful porter's eyes, singing or instrument-playing beggars often gathered in the courtyard, usually with a barrel organ. They drew the attention of the residents to themselves through these "noises". The faster one responded with monetary donations, the sooner the beggars disappeared again. It was customary to wrap the gifts in paper and throw them down into the courtyard. Since in our apartment the window to the courtyard was in front next to the toilet, this window served such a purpose for us. And since the toilet was close by, the coin was usually wrapped in toilet paper. How often have I done that! My room was very close, and I was quick to make the throw.

The windows of the living area faced Reichsstraße. In 1922, there wasn't much going on there, and according to stories, there were even meadows opposite where you could dry laundry. But that must have changed soon, because in my memory the opposite side was densely built up with apartment buildings.

Reichsstraße had two roadways and a wide green strip in the middle. Trams used to run there in earlier times, maybe even in the first years we lived there. I have a vague memory somewhere. By the standards of the time, there was probably lively traffic on Reichsstraße, but from today's perspective, only minimal. It was pleasant living.

We had little or no contact with other parties in the house. An exception was the family of lawyer Platz in the apartment opposite. There were two daughters about the same age. They were dutifully invited to children's birthday parties. Once, the Platzes hung a picture and the nail came through to our side. Otherwise, nothing comes to mind on the topic of "Platz".


5. Early Years in Berlin

Early years? Memory hasn't set in yet, but looking at the photo albums helps, even if the captions are sparse. It would be best, of course, if the reader could now look over my shoulder as I stroll through the past and flip through the albums with me. Do I want this also because I was such a delightful child?!

Not right away, of course. The first photos are captioned "1922", so it was shortly after birth. There's a nurse with a baby, and then naturally there's the photo of the mother bending joyfully over the baby, and one of the beaming father who has been handed the baby to hold.

An event falls into that time which, of course, I only know from stories. In a friend's house, a nanny was carrying me down a wide but steep stone staircase. Suddenly she stumbled and fell. And I with her. The parents were standing at the bottom. Their hearts almost stopped when they saw and heard how I fell from step to step, plop, plop, plop... Result: blood from mouth and nose, but apparently no lasting damage to the head. Or was there?! Not quite as exciting was when, pushed in the pram into the conservatory, I managed to wriggle free despite being strapped in, so that I was hanging over the edge of the pram, wailing pitifully.

This time also saw my temporary food refusal. I gave the impression of accepting what was offered, but then kept it in my cheeks and was, if at all, only with difficulty persuaded to swallow. As preparation for this, I was usually taken on someone's lap so that the coaxing could be more personal. Once, when I had collected a particularly large amount in my cheeks and apparently had no desire at all to ingest it, the spat-out food landed on my father's plus-fours, which had just been newly acquired. It was said later that a somewhat fidgety (or hysterical?) nanny had caused a kind of blockage in me, which was over the moment the nanny had left us.

The photos from 1923 then already show a rather active-looking little boy in a high wicker pram with enormous wheels, an indication of how things were back then. (People didn't usually have a car then either, into which this vehicle would have had to be stowed.) Oma Maurer also poses for the camera with her grandson - he's the first, and will remain the only one. She was living in Berlin at the time, with Uncle Kurt and Aunt Fränzel in Wilmersdorf, Sächsische Straße 66.

More people then appear in the photo album. Sofie is particularly worth mentioning. She has a history closely intertwined with ours. She had been with us as a domestic employee since my parents married, first as a "maid of all work", later mainly responsible for the kitchen. She was the niece of the cook in Opa and Öms' household, so here too the generation continued, so to speak. "Domestic employee" sounds almost like "slave" from today's perspective. But far from it! She belonged to the family and felt like it too. She came from Schwarzach am Rhein, a small town in Baden, but quickly got used to Berlin.

And then I was almost speechless when looking at the pictures. I discovered something I had never seen before, let alone suspected: my father on a bicycle! Anyone who ever knew and experienced him will understand my astonishment.

Then come the first attempts at walking. At the same time, Wolfgang enters the picture. Like me, he sits in a pram. Both his and mine are pushed by nannies. Both nannies were friends, and this brought Wolfgang and me together. Wolfgang Buchtal lived quite close to Reichsstraße 9. However, the family didn't live like us in an apartment in a tenement building, but rather in a large detached house, a villa, with a spacious garden by Berlin standards in this area. It was located, if I reconstruct correctly using the city map, at the corner of Linden- and Platanenallee. Wolfgang had two older siblings, Hugo and Anne-Gerda. His father was somehow involved in the textile industry and, as the house and garden indicated, apparently had a lot of money. I lost sight of the later fate of this Jewish family after we moved to Freiburg in 1932. Only Hugo was mentioned to me in the post-war period as a senior employee of the Warburg Institute in London.

Being together with Wolfgang runs through the photo albums of the coming years and I remember it too. The Buchtal garden in particular was a popular place to be, but we also appear in pictures elsewhere. Initially, the togetherness was certainly due to the friendship of the nannies, but it continued later as well.

Amid all the description of shared experiences with Wolfgang, it should not be overlooked that I had meanwhile become a boy whose silver-blonde curly hair made passers-by on the street turn around..., or so it was reported later. Even decades later, one of these curls, cut off at the time as proof or at least as a memento, slumbered in an envelope kept by my parents.

Like all small children, I was often sick with a sore throat and often with a cough too. I then got a damp compress around my neck, and a hot oil compress on my chest. The neck compress became almost a standard fixture and probably therefore firmly rooted in my thoughts, because when I saw the first giraffes in the Berlin Zoological Garden, the "Zoo", I asked if they also got a neck compress when they had a sore throat. Given the length of these necks, it seemed a bit difficult to me. Perhaps it was also after this zoo visit that when asked what I liked best about the lions, tigers, elephants, monkeys, etc., I replied: "The chickens!" They were probably the most familiar to me, at least the least dangerous.

I only know fragments of how my parents lived in the first Berlin years. It was the "Roaring Twenties", but both parents were certainly not active in this regard. However, as can be gathered from stories, they actively participated in the lively theater life of this period. Berlin offered something special here. They were usually very merry. Once, the parents had to leave a theater performance early because they were thoroughly amused that the actors were spraying streams of spit during loud parts. And theater at this time of expressionism took place at considerable volume. They probably went to the cinema quite often too. Cinema was still in its infancy then, but definitely something special. Once they arrived late for a showing. It was dark, and one had to feel one's way forward. Suddenly my father's hand rested on the bald head of a spectator sitting in a corner seat. The parents' resounding laughter then proved incompatible with the bald man's feelings.

That things were often merry with my parents is also proven by another little episode that I know from stories. They had read a crime novel titled "Men Who Cough in the Cellar". The content was as nonsensical as the title. Thereupon the book was thrown out of the window of the study onto Reichsstraße, and the parents nearly died laughing as the pages were turned by passing cars.

In Berlin there was the "Skala", a world-famous large variety theater. My parents must have liked going there and told me about it. When I was given a wooden Punch and Judy figure, my mother called it "Herr Skälchen". That's what he remained for a long time. After visiting a Skala performance, one occasionally went to the gourmet restaurant "Horcher". It was so fine that there were no prices on the menu. The Horcher management then set the prices according to their own assessment of the guests. It wasn't the financial, but the personal evaluation that was decisive. My father had good cards here, because he was friends with Horcher. He had frequented the place a lot when he was still alone in Berlin setting up his company and living there. According to his stories, Horcher also lent him money when he was short of cash.

Even my unsportsmanlike mother was enthusiastic about the ice hockey games in the Berlin Sportpalast, my father anyway. She still talked in old age about "the Canadians" who had shone there, and could even still name names. Likewise, she remembered the "Sportpalast Waltz", which always sounded at such events and which the spectators whistled along to. However, the parents did not go to the Six-Day Races, which also took place in the Sportpalast. Incidentally, the most famous German racing cyclist Stöpel, who was often successful and very popular in the Sportpalast, later married my nanny with the nickname Tato.

The memories of these early years include, quite prominently, Opa's visits to Berlin. As a member of over 20 supervisory boards, he had a lot to do in Berlin. Berlin was, after all, the capital of the Reich and thus also the center of business and finance. When Opa was in Berlin, he stayed at the Palace Hotel, which, I believe, was located at Potsdamer Platz. He often invited us to dinner. That was always an event for me. We drove into the city center and entered the hotel, which was leading in Berlin. In the dining room, the waiter who knew us was already waiting and had spread out one of the large napkins on the seat of the chair at the table reserved for us. Why? Because the chairs were upholstered with velvet and I had a physical aversion to velvet (and still do). When sitting on velvet, my hair stood on end - if only a little. But in winter, something else happened before I sat down. The winters in Berlin were very cold. The child Peter was dressed accordingly. And Opa amused himself each time anew when various pants were taken off me before we sat down.

I remember another hotel, the Hotel Esplanade. My father had his hairdresser there and also talked about it. Only I couldn't make much of "Esplanade". So I called it "Hotel Espinat".

I have my own memory of everything my father wore. What does that mean? Simply: shoes, suits, etc. It was all handmade. The shoes were made piece by piece by a shoemaker, either because certain orthopedic things had to be considered due to the sciatica condition, or because my father was used to it from his earlier London times. The suits, of course, came from the tailor. But that was nothing special at the time. Firstly, it was much cheaper than today, and secondly, there were no in-between sizes "off the rack". Finally, the shirts. They too were handmade. Why? Because only then could you have them buttoned all the way down. So you put the shirt on like a jacket, something extraordinary for those times, but it was very comfortable. Today, of course, all shirts are cut like this. Here too, the memory of London may have played a decisive role at the time. All this sounds very feudal and elevated. But the description would be incomplete if it were not emphasized that at least shoes and suits lasted for decades, and my father was proud to mention on occasion how old the garment in question was.

Life in Berlin was of course often interrupted by trips to Opa and Öms. Summer holidays in Königstein, when we fled from the hot "dog days" of Berlin, were just as much a matter of course as Christmas and New Year's Eve in Frankfurt. We traveled by train from Berlin, Anhalter Bahnhof. When we traveled during the day, I was often urged to sleep. If that didn't work, I was told the conductor would come soon to check on it. And since the conductor was a person of respect, I was a bit apprehensive about that.

While we all went to Frankfurt for Christmas, my father stayed in Berlin most of the time in summer. He had two reasons for this, and I still don't know today which was the more important one. Firstly, he had his grain company in Berlin and had to take care of it. Secondly, however, his heart was set on golf. At the Golf and Country Club Wannsee, he belonged to the board as treasurer and was at home there. He could also live there and was provided with breakfast and dinner in our absence. In the club he met friends, including the son of Kaiser Wilhelm II, who abdicated in 1918, who was still called "Crown Prince". He felt comfortable in the club, played bridge and sat together with people in the evenings. Of course, golf was not neglected either. For a short time he then came to Königstein too, but only for a short time.

My mother was also a member of the golf club. But she didn't care much for it, just as she was rather reserved towards social activities in general. She didn't really like bridge either and was therefore a poor player. At home, however, there were occasionally larger invitations, for which Sofie prepared delicious menus.


6. Königstein: The Grandparents' House at Ölmühlweg 33, Corner of Grüner Weg

This was the address of the grandparents' summer house, where, as already reported, their children experienced a carefree youth. This was to continue with the grandchildren. And not only that. In Königstein, family ties were established and strengthened on a broad basis. Here lived the extended Katzenellenbogen family, including their married branches, and not infrequently even including friends of the married branches. What Königstein was can hardly or not at all be put into words. Only those who have experienced it themselves know what I mean, and will accompany such memories with a quiet smile.

Where did it all take place? I want to sketch the surroundings a bit, then later reports will be more vivid, perhaps even a little imaginable. - It was a large house and overall a huge property. And it is still a large house today. But anyone who comes into the house today has no chance of even imagining a hint of the rooms and atmosphere as we experienced it then, because today everything has been rebuilt and changed following the compulsion of events. Walls have been drawn where generosity once reigned. Only from the outside is a little of the original impression still conveyed. As an Art Nouveau villa, the house is now under historical preservation.

But let's go back to the past. The interior of the house was dominated by a huge hall, which one entered after coming either through the front door and the cloakroom corridor or from the other side, the garden side, via the terrace. From the hall, there were several paths. One led past the sideboard (here the dishes came up from the kitchen with a small hand-operated elevator) into a very large dining room, where there was easily room for a gathering of well over 10 people at the long table.

Past the massive tiled stove, one entered the "yellow" room, so named after the color of the furniture there. This is where those who were not indulging in games like bridge or others at the card table in the middle of the hall mainly stayed in the evening. The yellow room was also ideal for patience players.

Facing the garden on the dining room side was a long, open terrace and at right angles to it a covered, roughly square terrace. On the open terrace, breakfast was often taken in fine weather; the covered one was very suitable for staying on rainy but warm days and on warm evenings.

From the hall, a wide staircase led up to the first floor, that is, to a corridor that was separated from the hall by a railing. From there, one had a good overview of everything that was happening downstairs. After we had been tucked into bed, we children often knelt behind the railing at night to observe the adults' activities. The grandparents' and guests' bedrooms and washrooms adjoined the corridor. At the end, another staircase led to the upper floor, where the domestic staff and the gardener couple with their daughter lived. There was also a bathroom and additional sleeping accommodations for guests, for who didn't come to Königstein! I had almost forgotten the existence of an ironing and sewing room.

From the hall, one could go not only up but also down. The cellar was not a real cellar, it was a basement. That means the windows were above ground level. The most important thing in the basement was a huge kitchen. This was where the cook Christine reigned - in the truest sense of the word. But she had to reign, for how else could the feeding of the extended family and entourage have been managed. Christine was the aunt of "our" Sophie and also from Schwarzach. She too was always a part of the Katzenellenbogen family. She was in charge of 1-2 maids who, in addition to their duties for kitchen auxiliary work and serving at the table, were mainly responsible for keeping the rooms in order.

The garden, which was huge, first surrounded the house with lawn, flower beds, and old trees. Furthermore, it extended far down, following a sloping hill on the terrace side. One could walk around it on paths. In between, not far from the house and a little lower down, was the "tennis court". This used to be a tennis court, although probably hardly meeting championship requirements. However, it had been decommissioned long before my time and then ideally served numerous activities. It has become historic mainly through recurring battles in croquet games, whose loud accompaniment could be heard far and wide.

But that wasn't all. When you left the property and passed the goat and chicken coops down the Grüner Weg, after about 50 meters you came to the "field". This was the true realm of the gardener Reul. For here, in the open field and in hotbeds, almost everything imaginable in terms of vegetables and fruit in our latitudes grew. I particularly remember the strawberry, raspberry, and currant seasons. From the berries, Christine conjured up delicious red fruit jellies, mind you without kernels, because they remained in the cloth through which the juice was strained beforehand. Less memorable were various types of cabbage, especially savoy cabbage, because what came to the table had to be eaten. With Brussels sprouts, I was lucky. Öms didn't like them either...

Finally, there was a separate meadow, about 300 meters away, which only served to make hay. I don't know why this was done. The gardener couple's goat hardly consumed the amounts harvested here. Probably this property was primarily a real estate investment.

Königstein! What diversity does the mention of this name convey! Life and activities there will later flow into one chapter or another in more detail. The beautiful aspects of the first years of my life will become sad in later years.


7. Frankfurt: The Bank, Neue Mainzer Straße 32

Opa was, as they say, a "big shot" here with an official residence - upstairs. - But let's stay downstairs first, where the bank with counters and other rooms was housed. Opa's office with secretary Miss Denk. Uncle Eugen's office as syndic. This is what I still remember.

But before entering the bank, passing a thick column with a shiny brass plaque, one passed a uniformed porter, Mr. Schneider. He was, of course, much more important to us children than any other bank employee or "bank official", as it was called then and for a long time afterward. Mr. Schneider was impressive not only because of his uniform, which was styled in a restrained manner. At least as impressive was his figure: tall, fat, simply imposing. And he was very nice, always present with a personal word. Besides the functions important for the bank, Mr. Schneider had a side function that was the most important for us children. He put the newspapers and mail intended for the grandparents in a small hand-operated elevator and transported them upstairs to the official residence. At that time, by the way, there were three mail deliveries per day and two editions of the "Frankfurter Zeitung". Sometimes we children were allowed to pull the rope to set the elevator in motion.

A wide marble staircase in a corresponding stairwell led to the apartment. The apartment entrance was, I believe, on the 2nd floor. Next to it was also the apartment of Mr. Strück, the caretaker. Upon entering the grandparents' apartment, one came into a large anteroom, from which the large rooms living room and dining room branched off, as well as a corridor at one end of which were the utility rooms, i.e., kitchen, pantries, sideboard, etc., and which led to some rooms on the other side, whose purpose I no longer remember exactly. I only know that one room was Opa's study with a desk chair that creaked mightily when one sat down. But this part of the apartment was not of primary interest to me as a child anyway, whereas the other part with the large living room, the scene of the annual Christmas, and the adjacent dining room, so spacious that the extended family found room at the multiply extended table, was important. But there was also a huge "credenza" on which the dishes were first placed and whatever other heavy dining room furniture of the time there was. Still to be added is the large wall clock in the anteroom. It was professionally wound up at certain intervals by a watchmaker specially ordered for this purpose. I often wondered if a layman couldn't have managed that. But that's how it was back then.

However, that was only half the apartment. From the anteroom below, a staircase led up to another floor. It ended upstairs in another anteroom, from which bedrooms, a short and a long corridor branched off. The short corridor ended in the ironing and sewing room, where Mrs. Kirmse, the seamstress, occasionally sat down at the sewing machine to put one thing or another back in order. There was also a bathroom and toilet there. Along the long corridor were the rooms for the domestic staff and a room where suitcases and many other things were stored. In this corridor, rings for gymnastics hung from the ceiling.

What was most interesting for me in this upper floor? Two things. First, the storage room. It was wonderful to rummage and snoop around here in boxes and crates and suitcases and generally: One came across all kinds of odds and ends and often new things. Toys of the Katzenellenbogen children including a castle with tin soldiers from Uncle Adolf, old costumes, a children's toy store, sleds, scooters (with which one could wonderfully romp along the long corridor), nameless small things of various kinds. They were really adventurous forays full of surprises about what one came across. The second attraction was the closets in the anteroom. Here, too, were toys and books, including doll dishes, games, and books. Among the books, I learned about Indian stories for the first time, but also reports about past wars. For example, the book about the war against France in 1870/71 was called "German Loyalty, Welsh Perfidy", very typical of the image of France as the "hereditary enemy" that prevailed in Germany for decades or even centuries. Anyway, rummaging through all these things was much more interesting than being at home with one's own toys.

It should be added that the bank building was not destroyed by the war and still served the Commerzbank for a few years after the war. Finally, however, it had to give way to a new modern office building. It was totally demolished, and with it the memories contained therein.


8. Life in Berlin and Travels from There

The photo albums still need to help activate memories. But why not? Otherwise, there would remain a blank spot for the early years. So let's follow the pictures. First, just concerning Berlin. At 2 years old, I'm already quite respectable. If you don't believe it, please consult the albums. Hand in hand with Father. (Father, by the way, quite up to date with white gaiters.) - Together with Grandma Maurer on my 2nd birthday. (She looked the same 30 years later.) - I still have blonde curls. (But no longer silver-blonde!) - Then together with Wolfgang. Both only two years old, but apparently fully present and actively mobile. (But enough now with the praise of the boy(s)!) - Then a picture that, enlarged and framed, still stood on a table in the apartment much later. It showed me, totally desperate, with a broken kite. - Dogs also come into the picture. We always had them. First a Schnauzer, then an Airedale Terrier. I got along well with them (as I still do today). I had nothing to do with cats (as I still don't today). - Hanging on the parallel bars in Wolfgang's garden. In summer naked, only with a white sun hat; in winter well wrapped up, but also on the bars. And on the bars, the two nannies - known to be close friends - sitting.

In the albums of these years and in the following ones, of course, a lot of Königstein. But I want to leave that out for now, because there's a lot, lot of material for later chapters. Naturally, much more was photographed in summer. Therefore, Königstein fills many pages of the albums.

From Berlin, we once took a winter vacation in Oberhof, when I was 4 1/2 years old. Who was there? The photos only give snippets. My mother can be seen (crisp!) and Uncle Adolf. Winter sports meant sledding. No thought of skiing back then, in the winter of 1927. Uncle Adolf in a winter coat (what was probably called a "paletot") and with a hat. He was 25 years old at the time. Not only from today's perspective, but also from the perspective when I myself was 25 - that is, 1947 - one might smile about it. But that's how the times were then. All quite normal.

Other holiday pictures are from summer vacations at the seaside. Once in Holland, Wyk aan Zee. With the Berndts (Aunt Gretel and the two cousins Rolf and Dieter). Sophie also accompanied us, and the Berndts had brought Dieter's nanny Therese, who was only ever called "Hesa" by us; a loving name invented by the toddler Dieter and eternally remained. If you follow the stories, we didn't behave particularly well there. As the pinnacle, it was mentioned that Cousin Dieter had done his big business in front of the front door of the guesthouse where we were staying. Whether this was out of necessity, frustration, protest, or provocation, I don't know. It just lay there, the pile, and caused a disturbance.

Wangeroog, there we were only three of us, that is, accompanied by the nanny Tato. Father, as already mentioned, stayed in Berlin during such trips. There I sat on a horse for the first time. Certainly not on a big one, but still. I remember exactly that I had stepped in a cow pat shortly before. It's evident in the photo, because one of my shoes was white, while the other was dark.

At Easter, we sometimes went to Great-uncle Fredi Katzenellenbogen's estate. This was first Mandelkow and later Freienhagen. The estates were in the Mark Brandenburg. That means we had the east in mind as our destination. This was quite different from the south, which we always headed to with Frankfurt and Königstein. I believe that with the exception of these two places, we never went further east than Berlin, even later.

From Berlin, one had to start from a different train station than usual, namely from Schlesischer Bahnhof instead of Anhalter Bahnhof. It first went to Oranienburg. There, change to a branch line and continue to the small station that was near the estate. From there we were picked up by horse-drawn carriage. The roads were divided into two strips. Only one was tarred, the other was firm but when a cart drove on it, it was enveloped in thick dust. On the estate itself, exciting things awaited me. I only knew animals from the Berlin Zoo! So it's not surprising that once, surrounded by hundreds (surely there were even thousands!) of chickens, I fled onto one of the large agricultural carts. I found plenty of playmates on the estate. Uncle Fredi and Aunt Gertrud had four children. (The parents and two children later fell victim to Nazi terror.) In both places, there were large manor houses with many guest rooms and extensive park grounds. There I mounted a bicycle for the first time and fell while romping wildly, so that I had to be treated for a gash on my head.

The children's birthdays were lavish. They took place in the large dining room. About 10 children with all kinds of games. I especially remember the soap bubbles. Large and small creations were produced with all kinds of tubes and whistles and driven around the room. Everyone had a bowl of soapy water in front of them for this purpose. Then of course there was egg-and-spoon races, blind man's buff, and whatever else. Sweets hardly existed for me. Above all, I was forbidden to have candy. (My teeth have thanked me for it to this day!)

Gradually, I would need the photo albums less and less, but I still don't want to miss out on them. My own albums are now added to those of my parents. I had started to take photographs myself. For this purpose, I used the simplest device available at the time, the Agfa Box, a square box into which a 6x9 film was inserted. You just pressed a lever, and then the picture was taken, somewhat or not. Bright sunshine was, of course, a requirement. At first, I only photographed dogs. Large and small, purebred and mixed breeds. When too many breeds had crossed, my father spoke of the "East African cliff dog" or - somewhat milder - of a "promenade mix". The photos taken by my parents often no longer ended up in albums. They were not glued in but collected in two drawers of my mother's desk. Why only there? I don't know. But whenever I was sick, I found this arrangement very pleasant. I would bring the drawers to my bed and enjoy the photos.

School time came. My parents probably wanted me to start a little later, so they sent me to a private school. This cost tuition, but you only had to complete three years of pre-school, not four as in the state elementary schools. So I didn't lose a year. The classes were small; I count 12 students in a class photo. The school was run by Mrs. Thie. Miss Jonscher was the female teacher, Mr. Nistler the male teacher. (Please note, this isn't written under any photo; this is emerging memory!)

The way to school was about 25 minutes long and led along Reichsstraße over Reichskanzlerplatz to Kaiserdamm and then along it, over the railway bridge, first street left and first right. That was Horstweg. The walking time was usually longer than 25 minutes, because we often made the journey in groups of four. We, that was Uni Bull with her mother and me with my mother. For a while, we were accompanied there and picked up. Uni Bull was the daughter of a Norwegian delegation councilor at the Norwegian embassy in Berlin. The family lived on Soorstraße, which was a right side street shortly after Reichskanzlerplatz. (I've looked at the city map. The street has changed its name. Therefore, I can't pinpoint the exact location.) We met and parted at the corner. Uni became my very close friend, and Wolfgang was mentioned less. But why did the school journeys become longer? Because we children ran ahead, hid in doorways and behind other things, and then had a great time when we ambushed and frightened the mothers with our shouting. With Uni, there were of course also many children's birthdays, especially since other families with children lived in her house, who quickly became familiar to me.

School was peaceful. And I can't remember any school difficulties. Perhaps only noteworthy is the fact that the father of a classmate was one of the first Nazis, and his son was proud of it. Heinz Boeck was quite a rowdy - the only one in the class - and he was almost expelled once after it came out that he had thrown a 1kg weight belonging to the school into the Spree. How terrible!

Every year there was a school trip. A boat was always rented and it always went through the Havel lakes to a place where we stopped at a restaurant and - also always! - were served rice pudding. I hated rice pudding back then! (Not at all anymore today.) The trip was always very nice, because the water surroundings of Berlin are really attractive.

A Christmas celebration at the school is also worth remembering. The Christmas tree caught fire. Horror spread among students, present parents, and teachers. But Mrs. Thie's husband, who otherwise never appeared, tore down the curtain of the stage and smothered the fire. The deed of this upright man was praised for years to come, strangely enough always by Opa, although he had no idea about the school and it probably hardly played a role in his thinking. But Mr. Thie with the curtain in his hand and extinguishing the fire, that had stuck with him.

What did I do together with my parents? I often see myself sitting with my mother in the Biedermeier room. She busy with needlework, me with something or other. She was the good star at every children's birthday party. Now and then we went to the zoo together. Once - Wolfgang was there too - we were photographed with two little lion cubs in our arms. I've already mentioned the daily school journeys with her. They took up a lot of time, especially the return journeys. We dawdled and had a lot of fun, usually together with Uni Bull and her mother. Not much fun, but anger I caused her when I once hit a dear guest, Dr. Döderlein, in the right eye with a paper projectile that I launched with a rubber band, just as he was about to go from the Biedermeier room to the dining room.

Of course, she was also responsible when guests came. Together with Sophie, the menus were discussed. I always noticed the arrival of the guests exactly, because my room was right at the apartment entrance. My door, which was otherwise always left ajar when going to bed with the light switched on outside, was of course closed when the guests arrived.

With my father, I went up and down Reichsstraße shopping. This began right at Reichskanzlerplatz in the cigar shop Palm. (It still exists in the same place today.) Next to it was a haberdashery shop, Hirschberg, and a bit further on a men's outfitter. The owner was a fop. We contemptuously called him "Bubi". Diagonally opposite was a hardware store, where one bought nails and similar things. On "our" side, corner of Stormstraße, a dry cleaner's. Of course, I don't remember every shop there, but very strongly the following stores. First on the opposite side, corner of Kastanienallee, Bolle, responsible for dairy products. There were nice girls there, we always bought crème double and were eternally in "dispute" about whether it was cheese or not. Because back then I detested cheese and was proud to notice when someone tried to slip me a sandwich with cheese.

But let's continue along Reichsstraße. We then come to Mr. Räntsch's photo shop. Here we were a constant guest. Not because of films to be developed, but because Mr. Räntsch was an active rugby player. Father, as an inveterate Anglophile, was of course a fan of this sport and reveled in memories of rugby experiences from his London years. We then went to the games of Mr. Räntsch's team on many Sundays. Since the players didn't treat each other very gently, he constantly had some aches and pains somewhere.

Next to Mr. Räntsch was a paper shop, above which "Montblanc" was written in large letters. So that's what we called it. Here, and not at Heidemann's, everything related to paper was bought. Because at Heidemann's there was a parrot, and in those years there was a lot of talk about the deadly parrot disease. I had a strict ban on Heidemann's, but occasionally bought a school notebook there anyway, because you don't see and hear a parrot every day.

If we wanted to eat out, we went to "Schrauder". The restaurant was near Reichskanzlerplatz and was certainly called something quite different, but we named it after the owner. He was his own waiter and always wore a greasy tailcoat. He wasn't the cleanest in other ways either. We made up a rhyme: "Schrauder has rotten teeth, the whole town knows that." But we were always well served and were satisfied with the food.

... Let's stay with the aforementioned crème double for one more peculiarity. As a child, I couldn't stand cheese and didn't eat any. My parents didn't force me. Crème double didn't belong to the category of "cheese". I liked to eat it. Once at dinner, I ate a piece of bread spread with this topping. But something seemed strange to me. I "sensed" cheese, so to speak, but didn't say anything. Suddenly my father laughed: "You've just eaten cheese and didn't notice!" - "Yes, I did notice something." - "I don't believe you." - We argued a bit more, and my father remained adamant in his assertion. But I was deeply affected and hurt. No, I wasn't a liar! That he didn't believe me! - This incident has firmly stuck in my memory, as justice was something decisively important to me.

On the subject of Father, two more things are worth mentioning. First, the matter with "Oxygen Rotor". This was a device that was supposed to be hung in cinemas and - equipped with a small propeller - was meant to ensure good air. Father had been talked into it by the inventor and had invested money in the perfection of this "epoch-making" invention. How much, I don't know. In any case, it turned out to be a total failure, and the money was gone.

The second thing goes in a political direction. As already described, Reichsstraße led to Reichskanzlerplatz. Dr. Goebbels lived there, at that time Gauleiter of Berlin for the National Socialist German Workers' Party, the NSDAP. He was also the publisher of a newspaper called "Der Angriff" (The Attack). Every day it was sold on the street in front of Goebbels' residence. My father, until the end of his life affably connected with simple people, often got into conversation with the newspaper seller when he passed by, and so slowly became interested in the whole NSDAP affair. He also occasionally attended rallies that took place in the Sportpalast. The NSDAP philosophy had strong national traits, and this appealed to father's feelings as a former active officer. To what extent he fell for the promises of these people, I don't know. Certainly not decisively, although there was a certain attraction and interest was aroused. In the elections, of course, neither of my parents voted for the NSDAP. They followed their national feeling and preferred the German Nationalists. Sentimentally, however, my father was still attached to the monarchy. Whether he also congratulated the Kaiser, who abdicated in 1918, on his birthday every year from Berlin, I don't know; he did it later from Freiburg. In Berlin, he held on to his feeling for the Kaiser's oldest son, the Crown Prince, with whom he really had a kind of friendship and whom he, as far as I know, of course always addressed as "Imperial Highness". As a small note, it should finally be noted that for years, when a political election was coming up, I always said "you're going to wag". In our household, which always had dogs, a completely normal process. What did I know about what voting was!

I eagerly collected pictures that were given with cigarette packs as a buying incentive. Especially the brand Abdullah had a good nose for what children liked. There were car types, marine pictures, uniforms, and many other things. I collected, traded, and glued albums full. Paternal connections to tobacco shops were helpful.

Meanwhile, I had discovered that it was fun to engage with a book. Of course, it wasn't high-flown literature. These were children's books, but beautiful ones. I often accompanied my father to the bookshop "Das Buch" at the beginning of Kaiserdamm, where he discussed with Mr. Miesner, the owner, while I sniffed through the shelves. At the beginning, the author Josephine Siebe was particularly popular. She wrote volumes of Kasperle books, which I owned all of over the course of birthdays and Christmases, and which described the adventures of a Kasperle who had been given a life-giving elixir. This funny character experienced all sorts of things, the stories were really exciting, including with Princess Gundolfine at Castle Himmelhoch. What thought paths such remembering takes!

Similar things happened in the teddy bear books. There were 6 teddy brothers, who had been brought to life by a teddy maker. He named them after the vowels Bum, Bam, Bom, Bem, Bim and the sixth "August". The latter had a seat made of a different fabric because the previous fabric wasn't quite enough. August was the cheekiest. There were several volumes with the adventures of the teddy brothers. I devoured them all and derived a love for my own teddy bears from them. You can see that in pictures. Of course, they slept with me, and when I had an appendix operation, I also operated on a teddy bear and sewed up the "wound".

Another beloved series of volumes dealt with the adventures of Doctor Dolittle with his animals. Not to forget also the two books by Erich Kästner "Emil and the Detectives" as well as "Pünktchen und Anton".

The books of the Franz Schneider publishing house must not go unmentioned, at the top "Minewitt macht nicht mehr mit" (Minewitt doesn't play along anymore) and "Minewitt und Knisterbusch in Australien" (Minewitt and Knisterbusch in Australia). The boy Minewitt became my idol as well as the young Kai from "Kai aus der Kiste" (Kai from the Box). If you asked me about the content, I could still retell it today.

The Indian books followed with some distance, which I devoured in quantities. My father pulled out the first ones on a birthday from his famous armchair, Leatherstocking 4 volumes, one after the other. These were "The Deerslayer", "The Last of the Mohicans", "The Pathfinder", "The Prairie". I still know many titles and authors, even some contents of other Indian books. For example, there was "The Trapper" by Ferry with the main actors Rosewood and Pepe, who was called "Pepra" by my father, because that was the name of a family we were friends with. Important, because historically authentic, were for me the "Frontiersman's Book", which I found in my parents' bookshelf, and the books by Fritz Steuben "The Flying Arrow", "The Red Storm" and "Tecumseh and the Leatherstocking". "Buffalo Bill" played a role and much more. I would like to stick my nose into one or the other book again today, like for example "Mitahasa, the Powder Face". It was a real Indian passion. The Karl May books came later, but I also devoured them one after the other.

The extensive reading even drove me to the thought of writing an adventure novel myself. I began, managed to write 2 1/2 pages after all, and ended at the dramatic moment when the hero, whom I gave the name "Peter Pogge", boarded the battleship "Whale", encountered an old friend there and greeted him with the question "What are you doing here?". I couldn't think of anything else then. - It should be noted, however, that I had derived the name "Peter Pogge" first from myself, of course, but then from Erich Kästner's children's book "Pünktchen und Anton", because Pünktchen's last name was "Pogge"!

Besides reading, listening slowly began to enter consciousness. The radio began its triumphal march. These were strange devices. It began with the so-called detector, a thing to build yourself. Two wire coils, a headphone and a small something, the detector, were bought, in which encapsulated on one side a small wire to be moved from the outside with a small lever could be seen and on the other side a kind of crystal. When the two coils were then mounted on a small box (e.g. a cigar box) so that they could be moved against each other, the detector was mounted on the box and wired with the detector and the headphones were also connected, you put the headphones over your head, tapped around with the wire on the crystal, and when a sound was heard, you moved the coils a bit more to improve reception. Quite far away, the station then reported, and one was proud of the tinkering and reception. A step higher were then devices that were connected to a battery. Electricity from the socket was not yet applicable at that time.

No coincidence that at this time the "Funkturm" (radio tower) became popular. It stood near the Berlin transmitter and was modeled after the Parisian Eiffel Tower, only much smaller. You could climb it or take the elevator up to enjoy a magnificent view. I can still remember it well.

At Reichskanzlerplatz, corner of Kaiserdamm, our barber resided. While father's hair was cut on a proper chair, whose up and down was effected by foot lever, which impressed me enormously, I sat on a horse or lion when Mr. Beiker, who was responsible for father and son, cut my hair.

A not funny, but rather very exciting experience should conclude this chapter. We were once again on the way to Frankfurt by train and sat, as usual, in 3rd class. For some reason, it was decided to upgrade to 2nd class, and we moved to another carriage. A little later the train derailed, some carriages fell over, but not the carriage we had just moved to. The reason for the accident was an attack on this train. The perpetrator's name was Matuschka, the place where it happened was Jüterbog. A relief train came to the rescue, which we boarded. Since all this happened on the open track, the distance from the carriage door to the ground was very large. I still remember well that the locomotive driver lifted me out of the carriage. I was impressed upon by my parents that I should never let Grandma Maurer know that we had been on this train. Otherwise, she would have been too upset about it in retrospect.


9. Christmas and New Year's Eve in Frankfurt

It's time now to report about Christmas and New Year's Eve in Frankfurt. As long as we lived in Berlin, I can't remember any Christmas there. After moving to Freiburg, we developed and enjoyed our own Christmas there. But before that, Frankfurt, Neue Mainzer Straße, was always on the program, where the extended family met. Attendance and proceedings were tradition. But one didn't go there out of a sense of duty, but full of inner joy. It may be that the families were glad to be relieved of Christmas preparation and the holidays themselves. As a child, of course, you don't notice that so precisely. But when I remember back, the togetherness enjoyed by all is always in the foreground.

Who was always there? First, of course, the grandparents, Opa and Öms. Then their children with their families. So the three Maurers, the four Berndts (Aunt Gretel, Uncle Erich, cousins Rolf and Dieter). Then from Leipzig Uncle Alfred, Öms' brother, with Aunt Annchen and of course Uncle Adolf, who was studying in Leipzig. The out-of-towners, that is, the Berliners and the Leipzigers, stayed in the Neue Mainzer. Always there, of course, were also the cook Christine, the maid Käthe, and whoever else was currently serving as a maid for all in the grandparents' service.

Christmas at the grandparents. Looking at the participants, from a religious point of view, there was a Jew (Opa), a baptized Jew (Öms), the children Martha, Grete, and Adolf who were baptized at birth, the Jewish-born (perhaps later baptized?) Uncle Alfred, definitely Jewish-born, maybe later baptized. Finally, the "genuinely" Christian other members of the Maurer and Berndt families.

Why do I differentiate in this way? Simply because Christmas was celebrated together here, which has no significance at all for the Jewish religion, but for Christians contains the birth of Jesus. What kind of Christmas was it in the Neue Mainzer Straße? It was a family celebration with a large Christmas tree, richly endowed gift tables, probably also with a Christmas carol, and a large evening table uniting all participants. Celebrating together, that was the motto of this festival, for which Christmas was just perfect. According to my memory, nobody went to church at that time. It wasn't really Christian either. Just "only" a family celebration. But the "only" was more important than any religion. It was wonderful. And since Jews are said to place the importance of family at the very top, our Christmas was a bit of a Jewish celebration.

The Christmas room was the huge living room. The Christmas tree was decorated with lots of tinsel. On the floor, the train was set up. Not electric, but wind-up. Around it stood the gift tables for the extended family and the servants. A bell called for entry, then we were allowed in. The tree was lit, it was always the same and always very beautiful. In one corner stood a children's toy store, with which the grandparents' children had already played. The small drawers and other containers were well filled with raisins and other treats. Öms had all this under equally generous direction. I can't remember any mishap. (Occasionally, a story from World War I was told. When there was bitter scarcity, Öms had still managed to bake Christmas cookies early. These were hidden to be brought out as a surprise at Christmas. Opa, however, had discovered the hiding place and was unable to curb his sweet tooth. He nibbled continuously, without uttering a word about it. When Öms wanted to bring out the surprise for Christmas, it had shrunk to an insignificant remnant.)

After the gift-giving, the sliding doors to the dining room opened, and the whole company sat around the extended table. This too was an act of joyful togetherness. I don't remember details anymore, except that everyone waited for Aunt Annchen to now indulge excessively, which soon happened. But she stood by her weakness for culinary pleasures, and all the others cheerfully, not maliciously, mocked her about it.

On the following two holidays, relatives and friends came. The relatives were the Flörsheim family from Beierseich: Uncle Rudi, Aunt Mariechen, and daughter Elisabeth. There was also a son Georg. But he was either not yet born or too small to come along. Uncle Rudi was the son of a sister of Öms. He had huge feet and always stepped on the rails of our train. We almost waited for it to happen.

Among the grandparents' friends were Dr. Brodnitz, a doctor with his wife and daughter from Jugendheim on the Bergstraße, and Dr. Alexander, a Frankfurt dentist, with his wife and son. I have only good memories of them. They were very dear people who, as Jews, later endured a difficult fate during the Nazi era, and of whom, as far as I know, only the son Alexander survived.

But the stay in Frankfurt was not limited to Christmas. New Year's Eve followed at the Berndt house in Paul-Ehrlich-Straße, that is, in Sachsenhausen not far from the Hippodrome, a few minutes from the Main. The house had three floors. Besides the parents and the two cousins, the nanny "Hesa", the cook Kedda, and the boxer dog Pan lived there. Participants in the New Year's celebration were, with the exception of the Beierseich people, all the others who had already been together in the Neue Mainzer. People were cheerful, amused themselves with games, and at the stroke of twelve poured lead together. The pieces of lead were held on a spoon over a flame until the lead liquefied. Then the spoon was tipped and the liquid lead poured into a bowl of water. The resulting bizarre shapes were interpreted in their meaning, which was important for the newly begun year. We children always liked to do this. But special enthusiasm was conveyed by the small gags that resulted from joke articles that Uncle Erich had bought. For example, some cigars and cigarettes were specially prepared and popped at the tip when lit. There were also chocolates filled with mustard. They were mixed among the normal chocolates, indistinguishable from them, and no one could be sure not to suddenly bite into mustard. These two gags spontaneously come to mind, but there were numerous others. It varied from year to year. So one was never sure not to fall into some joke trap.

Since it always got late, of course, I slept at the Berndts', together with Cousin Dieter in his room. Even when the Neue Mainzer Straße was overflowing with guests, I was quartered with the Berndts like this. We always had a lot of fun there. The window of the room faced Paul-Ehrlich-Straße. Three tram lines ran there, the 1, the 15, and the 21. Dieter claimed to recognize by the sound which line was just passing by. I had slight doubts, but still somehow admired his ingenuity. Of course, line 1 with its old cars, you could surely recognize by the sound. But the 15 and the 21, those were both always very modern cars that actually sounded the same. Still, I think I accepted his amazing knowledge without seriously checking the truth content.

When we got a ping pong table, it didn't take long for the enthusiasm for kicking to spill over into the new sport. Shortly after, there was also a ping pong table at the Zipfels, and from then on, when the weather allowed, there was hardly anything else but table tennis. The ping pong tables were always set up outdoors. In our house, there was no room big enough for it, and at the Zipfels even less so. There were many variations!

Of course, we were never in Frankfurt without also visiting Uncle Eugen and Aunt Anna. They lived together with the maid Lioba in the west of Frankfurt at Guiollettplatz in a rented apartment. A very quiet corner and yet close to the city center, ideal living. Uncle Eugen and Aunt Anna had, so to speak, remained stuck in the style of the time before World War I, which probably explains from the fact that they were a childless couple and stood somewhat helplessly in the face of the developing times. The apartment was dark and full of all dark furniture. Lots of plush. But the two old people - for they were always old to me - were very, very dear people. Certainly far too dear for this world. Uncle Eugen was, as is known, the legal counsel of Opa's bank as a lawyer. It was hardly possible to imagine him as an independent lawyer. But as Opa's right-hand man, he was certainly very good, being incredibly diligent and conscientious. He wore a pince-nez, which probably made him look older. Aunt Anna had a prickly beard, which I always noticed when I kissed her. Noteworthy were the meals, lovingly prepared by Lioba. When the roast came, Uncle Eugen took off his jacket and carved in his shirt sleeves. The same happened when the pudding was served and he diluted the raspberry concentrate with water.


10. The Time in Berlin Approaches Its End

The private Thie school lasted only three years. Despite the saved fourth year, one was absolutely on par with the required level of knowledge compared to the four-year elementary school. That my path should now lead me to a high school was clear. But which was the right one for me? Where was I especially talented? In languages? In natural sciences? There were no indications for anything. I was just a so-called normal student. So what to do?

Very nearby was the Herder School. It was a modern high school with modern languages and natural sciences in the foreground. The proximity seemed practical, but there was still my father's humanistic education. Whether that then tipped the scales for deciding on the Mommsen Gymnasium? I don't know. Anyway, I had to grapple with the ancient languages in the future, and natural science played a rather subordinate role. I mastered the first challenge quite well in the coming years. And later I was very glad to be less challenged in mathematics and science. My capacity for understanding proved to be only laboriously sufficient for the long term for the required and actually limited curriculum in a humanistic gymnasium.

The decision for the Mommsen Gymnasium meant a considerably longer school journey than would have been the case with the Herder School. But at least I didn't have to travel to the city center, where the Mommsen Gymnasium had its headquarters. The first three classes were namely relocated to the Grunewald. The lessons took place in wooden barracks or, in good weather, also outdoors. So ideal conditions! The way to school led past the Heerstraße station into the Grunewald. Quite nearby was another school, the Waldschule.

But before I was allowed to take this path, I had to undergo an entrance exam and prove that I had no deficits compared to the other students who had sat through four years, due to only three school years. I don't remember the exam itself. But apparently there were no difficulties. I was accepted. That attending a "higher school" cost tuition every month was a matter of course at that time, but may cause some astonishment from today's perspective.

On the other hand, the separation from the classmates of the old school who had become familiar to me was not easy. When I think about it today, the end of the friendship with Uni Bull was probably the most painful. But there is no memory of farewell pain, or whatever one would call such a thing. So it probably wasn't so bad! If we had been ten years older, who knows? The paths also parted with Wolfgang Buchtal. The friendship had already become less intense anyway, because Wolfgang didn't go to the private Thie school.

I got along very well with the new classmates very quickly. For the first time, sports played a certain role. At Thie, as far as I remember, there was almost no sports. This changed quite significantly at the Mommsen Gymnasium, not least due to the surroundings, because the school was located in the Grunewald. There were plenty of opportunities for sporting activities. The criterion of sportiness then proved to be important for me in where I sought my friends. Two boys in particular come to mind. One was called Marcks and was the son of a Reichswehr general who was also a historian. The second was called Israel and was, as the name already says, Jewish. The two lived in Stormstraße, so quite close to me, and were close friends.

Particularly worth mentioning is the class teacher of this sixth grade at the Mommsen Gymnasium, Mr. Pech. He made our entry into the "higher" school, as the high school level was called then, extremely easy. It was indeed an important step. Not only that nine classes of this school were now ahead of us, but the demands had also grown from the beginning, because for the first time we were confronted with learning a foreign language. Mr. Pech was in every respect the model of a teacher. I no longer know in which subjects besides Latin and Biology we had him. But it is symptomatic that I can't remember any other teacher for the short Berlin high school period than Mr. Pech. It was only half a year after all. At that time, the school years always began at Easter. And in autumn we moved to Freiburg.

With that, I'm already getting a bit ahead of myself. But before I go into that, I want to talk a bit about my parents' circle of friends. I don't remember much. It wasn't very interesting for me either. What remains are those who had something special to note. This included, for example, Mrs. Will. She carried an unimaginable bosom in front of her, which was usually adorned with some piece of jewelry. She had a special affinity for this, because she was, I believe, a trained goldsmith. Fate, however, had placed her quite differently, because she was the wife of a diplomat. Mr. Will was a retired envoy. The couple lived on Heerstraße, so in our neighborhood. She was a voluminous personality, he rather of puny stature. This once led to our porter's wife calling him back during a visit so that he could wipe his shoes better on the mat.

Another friend was Schorsch Möller. A genuine unmarried Berliner and old comrade from my father's New York days. He impressed me with his Berlin nonchalance. He will also appear as a friend in later years.

Then government master builder Karl Hoffmann. Also unmarried or perhaps divorced. He also lived on Reichsstraße and was a close friend. He owned a bungalow next to the Wannsee golf course, where we often visited. As an architect, he specialized in golf courses, but was also active in house building. My parents later gave him the commission to design the house in Freiburg.

Another friend of the family met an unexpected death at this time. I have already mentioned him, Dr. Döderlein, namely that I had shot him in the eye with a twisted paper. Of course, he didn't die from that. His death was caused by a boil in the nose, which affected the brain. That such a small foreign body could have such an effect was hardly comprehensible to us, because Dr. Döderlein was a giant. Since then, it has been a horror scenario for every family member to have an inflammation on and in the nose. This fear, which still exists today, is inseparably linked to the name Dr. Döderlein for me.

When did the idea come up to leave Berlin and move to Freiburg? I don't know. There is certainly an important connection with the difficulties of the Berlin brewery Schultheiß-Patzenhofer, the main buyer of barley, the main product of my father's grain import company. The brewery belonged to the group whose head was Lutz Katzenellenbogen, Opa's cousin, and this group was in great financial difficulties, which eventually even led to a lawsuit against Lutz Katzenellenbogen. Because of the brewery's difficulties, it was foreseeable that there was a danger for the sale of barley. If one prepared for this in time, the occurrence of losses could be avoided. Preparing for this in time meant liquidation of the grain company. And that was then initiated.

Without the company, the parents certainly were drawn back to the south of Germany, because both had their origins there. But now the question was where to take a new residence and on what basis to build it. Apparently, at the age of 51, taking up a new professional activity as a merchant was no longer an option. In contrast, educational considerations were in the foreground. So it was obvious to include a university town in the selection. Of course, there were many university towns in Germany, and I don't know why the choice fell on Freiburg. Perhaps because it was a charming small town of about 100,000 inhabitants, the cathedral with its square around it and the old town certainly had a great attraction, the Black Forest was at the doorstep, and whatever else was offered that was appealing. But probably also because my father had once spent a very pleasant time as a soldier in the Baden Field Artillery Regiment No. 30 in the Baden town of Rastatt. Rastatt and Freiburg, both were in Baden.

The idea of leaving Berlin was not comprehensible to me, however. I still remember well a tearful conversation with my parents, in which I kept saying that I would never, ever find a friend in Freiburg! I was 10 years old. That's an age when you start to go your own ways, make your own connections, build your own life. The days of preschool were over, the children's parties were over. I was now at a high school, had made the first friends I "felt" myself, and enjoyed the new school atmosphere, which was so lovable especially because of Mr. Pech. Here I had found the basis tailored to me, so to speak, for the new phase of life. And now that was to be taken away from me! I probably cursed my parents then. How could I guess that the decision to move to Freiburg not only opened up a wonderful new environment for me, but was also significant for the life, better: for the survival of the whole family. In Berlin, the effects of National Socialism would have hit us much harder and in all probability even fatally. -- But I don't want to get ahead of myself.

So the choice had fallen on Freiburg. Now it was a matter of finding a suitable domicile. Soon there was talk of building a new house. The parents were in Freiburg, had looked for a building plot and found something suitable. Who should now go into the planning, and how should the construction be carried out, when hundreds of kilometers lay between Berlin and Freiburg and the train connections were much slower than one can imagine today?

The solution to these problems began with friend Karl Hoffmann being commissioned to design a building plan. After this was decided, the construction company Denz in Freiburg was commissioned to carry out the construction. The garden design was put in the hands of the gardening company Martin Zimber. I later got to know and appreciate father and son Denz as well as Martin Zimber. With Zimber, a friendship even developed for the parents. In this respect, everything was arranged to the best satisfaction. Karl Hoffmann's building plan, however, turned out a bit pedestrian. Nothing against the house. We felt very comfortable in it in the coming years. But a bit more creative imagination would have done good. Karl Hoffmann was just more of a golf course architect. But more about that later.

I haven't mentioned a very important point yet. Among the Maurer brothers, it had meanwhile been decided that the responsibility for the mother should now pass to Alfred. After all, Eugen and his wife Anna had first taken care of the mother in Strasbourg after she had left or had to leave Saargemünd. Then Kurt and his wife Fränzel had taken their place and had taken the mother into the Berlin apartment in Sächsische Straße. Now Alfred and his wife Marti were building a house with the associated possibility of including rooms for the mother in the planning right away. So Alfred was doubly on: firstly, because he had never been in this responsibility before, and secondly, because he and his family would be dealing with a whole and own house in the future, while the other two brothers lived in rented apartments. So really a matter of course to now put him under obligation. I was neither present at these conversations, nor do I remember that the parents talked about it among themselves or with me. I didn't think about the connections at that time either. Grandma Maurer came along to Freiburg. That was a fact. No reason to dwell on it any longer. By the way, I had enough of my own worries going through my head at that time. It was time to say goodbye to Berlin. Before the summer holidays, I received a final report card from the Mommsen Gymnasium, which contained almost only good grades, and then I went first to Königstein for many weeks, where I stayed until we moved into Freiburg in September. The emptying of the Berlin apartment, the loading into the furniture vans, so all the final work, all that went on without me. Either the parents thought I would only disturb. Or they wanted to keep all this away from me, as they later did again and again with many unpleasant things.


11. Giving Names

Those who know our family and have read this far might wonder why I've always talked about "my father" and "my mother," when everyone knows that for decades and until the end of their lives, they were always called "Kro" or "Kromse" and "Mux" respectively. The reason I haven't used these names so far is clear. These names only emerged over the years, but I have no idea when. Only one thing seems certain to me: these names, like several others in the extended family circle, were created in Königstein. There, people were together for longer periods and close in every respect. People were cheerful and, as often led to such name-giving, they fooled around.

A starting point for the various inventions of names, which then often stuck to the people concerned, was the Kiko language. Kiko language? Yes, that was already a word from this language. It was the "Kindskopfsprache" (childish language), where the syllables were always abbreviated. Kindskopf = Kiko! In an extension of such fooling around, sometimes a "mse" was added. That then became "Kimse-Komse".

Names often evolved in several steps. For example, with me. "Peter" became "Fitter" and from that "Pitt". As a variation, "Pimse" was also heard temporarily. "Mux" was developed as follows. "Mutter" (mother) became "Mu" in the Kiko language, and because that sounded like the cry of a cow, an "x" was added. And "Mux" became a term for all who were connected with our family.

Now please don't ask me how "Kro" came about. That can no longer be traced back. The name was there one day and stayed, although when pronouncing it, the word almost gets stuck in your throat. An attempt will prove that! At least by adding a "mse", the pronunciation could be significantly facilitated. Even fooling languages have their advantages. Derived from "Mux", "Kro" also became "Krox" or "Kroxe". One had, so to speak, the choice.

Uncle Adolf had the nickname "Floh" (flea). This had nothing to do with the Kiko language at all. It arose from a word game of the Katzenellenbogen siblings. They spoke the names backwards. "Adolf" became "Floda" and from "Floda" simply "Floh". It's that simple!

The cousins Rolf and Dieter did it more simply. They became "Rollo" and "Diet", where "Diet" is explained by its proximity to "Pitt". We were together for many weeks in the summers and repeatedly throughout the rest of the year. The Kiko language was never involved here. No one ever came up with the idea of making "Dimse" out of Diet.

Opa called himself "Opakowski" and signed letters and cards to us two grandchildren like that. He was never called that by others and probably didn't want to be.

I wouldn't want to call all these names "nicknames", and "pet names" wouldn't be appropriate either - except for the Ajaxes, because that was a real term of endearment for Opa, as he of course also meant "Opakowski" for himself. Everything else was simply renaming within the family circle, and friends often joined in afterwards.

By the way, I've often wondered in my more mature years later how I called my parents before these renamings. I couldn't remember. "Father", "Papa", "Daddy", "Mother", "Mama", "Mommy"? No idea! What remained were the renamings. They have deeply embedded themselves.


12. Many Years of Summer Idyll in Königstein

Königstein, I have already described it. The ideal place to spend happy days. This was so when the Katzenellenbogen children Gretel, Martha and Adolf were growing up, and it continued when new families were founded and grandchildren were born. Many years, thus. But where to start now and how to continue without going from pillar to post?

Again, it's a good idea to first browse through old photo albums. There you see the Katzenellenbogen children with pony and cart. Gretel and Martha's friends are there too. There's Opa as an established man with a mustache, and Adolf with a Tyrolean hat and dog. The first tennis rackets appear, Gretel's fiancé and later husband Kurt Reichert - who fell after only a few months of marriage right at the beginning of World War I - sits on the stone steps to the tennis court. All this an overview of the happy summer life of the Katzenellenbogen family in their summer domicile Königstein.

The World War undoubtedly brought a caesura, because with increasing duration of the war, not only the front had to suffer. The home front suffered too. There were the hunger winters, and there was a lack of the most primitive things.

But in the twenties, Königstein came to life again. In Frankfurt, there was Gretel's family with her second husband Erich Berndt and son Dieter (called Diet) as well as son Rolf (called Rollo) from her first marriage. In Berlin, there were us three Maurers. Adolf was still unmarried at first, he was studying art history. Everyone met in Königstein more or less concentrated in the summer. There Diet can be seen together with me in photos, both still very small and in the hands of our mothers. Then a little bigger, and always together. My blonde curls at that time may have led to Diet's classic statement: "I'm not pretty, but nice!". We two, almost the same age, were inseparable, and I can't remember any serious quarrel. The long time that has passed since then may have covered up the negative moments in memory, but I believe it really was like that: inseparable and without quarrel. In this first phase of our childhood, Diet's nanny Resa (called Hesa) was usually also in Königstein, because Frankfurt was very close. In addition, Diet had difficulties falling asleep when Hesa wasn't nearby. Opa called us his two Ajaxes. As a graduate of a humanistic gymnasium who, as the best in his class, gave the closing speech in Latin at the Abitur celebration, he knew his Homer and his Iliad. There were the two Ajaxes there: Ajax the Locrian and Ajax the Telamonian. I could never distinguish whether I was the Telamonian or the Locrian.

Photos can only be an entry into the past. Memory is activated and begins to rotate. It's not easy to classify and organize at all. Questions arise. Yes, there was something, but when? What first and what later? I think the chronology is not so important. The main thing is that one thing must fit well to the other without an abrupt transition. The atmosphere must be palpable. The atmosphere as it was perceived by us children at the time, although it will hardly be avoidable that, since all this is written from a perspective about 60 years later, a shimmer of transfiguration certainly remains.

Maria, the daughter of the gardener Reul, belonged to us two little grandchildren from the beginning - Rollo was eight years older and in this respect not a playmate. In general, Diet and I spent a lot of time during the day in the Reul family's living kitchen downstairs in the house. That was very cozy. Another, albeit rare, playmate was Maria's cousin Franz, called Fränzsche. But he had a special characteristic to note. He had usually forgotten to close his fly. For decades, even later, the exclamation "Fränzsche Reul!" made the person concerned in the family aware that something was not in order with his pants. This was particularly helpful in the presence of the uninitiated.

A number of devices were available to us children for playing, which were kept in the so-called carriage house. Important there was first a handcart. In the early years, we pulled ourselves peacefully back and forth with a small one. Later, the now larger handcarts were misused for more violent games. We had also grown bigger and more robust and therefore dared to drive down the steep path by the meadow on the property, go into curves and tip over when the speed was too high. It was steered with the drawbar, which was clamped between the outstretched legs. But the handcart also served more peaceful purposes. When guests were expected - and many came - they didn't arrive by car, because hardly anyone had cars (only Dr. Alexander's son, which we greatly admired). The guests usually came by bus from Frankfurt. The bus stop was down at Ölmühlweg, so only 10 minutes from the house. Diet and I then took the handcart and picked up the guests. This fact interested us less than the possibility of tobogganing down Ölmühlweg with the handcart. It was less fun for us when guests came with the small train, which we called the "Bimmelbahn" (jingling train). The way to the station was much further.

The most important game from the carriage house utensils was croquet. It was suitable for young and old. Öms played as well as we children. In croquet, wooden balls are propelled with hammer-like mallets through "gates" (made of thick bent wire). Whoever completes the outward and return journey the fastest wins. The former tennis court was of course ideal for this game, and hardly a day went by without a game of croquet. Parties were formed for this, which fought against each other. Within the parties, one helped the other. All this went on with considerable noise development. There were standard shouts like "Hi hi, danebbermäscht!!" which meant that the opponent had just missed an enemy ball or shot beside a gate. The ideal mallet posture was controversial. Players experienced in golf swung the mallet sideways, others moved the mallet through their spread legs. Everyone swore by their technique. We all loved this game and suffered when illness or other things prevented us from being there. It hit me particularly hard once. I was sitting in an upstairs room being painted, because there was the painter Milly Marbe, who was making portraits in the family at the time. I considered this a completely superfluous undertaking, but would have at least kept still if it had rained on these days. But that was not the case. So I had to sit still in a room for several days in the most beautiful weather, through whose open window the shouts of the family members playing croquet penetrated. Truly a martyrdom! The finished picture showed me with a wooden tomahawk in my hand, which was probably meant to document that we had also played a lot of Indians in Königstein and were appropriately dressed up.

Opa was hardly ever there for croquet. But he loved to play boccia. That was also to be found in the carriage house and also served as a crystallization point for the extended family. The black ball was thrown out, and two parties tried to throw, roll or push as many balls of their color as possible near the black one. Opa was a master, and his balls falling from above destroyed many enemy advantages. The movements of his upper body described exactly the course of his ball. This game also often suited the croquet cry of "Danebbermäschen". A rather boccia-typical request to the members of a party was to make "a pile in front" to prevent the opposing party from getting to the black ball. Opa's skilled smashes then often destroyed this "pile".

There was also a ping pong table in the carriage house. We played up to Öms. Back then it was still called ping-pong and it was just that. Between ping and pong, especially with the older generation, there was rather a small pause. We children played faster, but there was no talk of smashes, cutting and other more modern arts. After all, we learned ball feeling and above all, it gave us and our friends tremendous fun. The ping pong table was set up at the end of the tennis court, where the ground had small cracks. As small children, we always feared that hell would be underneath.

Games in house, yard and garden. We didn't always need the carriage house for this. Sometimes a very simple purse was enough. Diet and I tied it to a very thin string and placed it in front of the massive wooden garden gate on the sidewalk of Ölmühlweg. We lay on the inside of the gate on the ground, protected from view from the outside. Then we waited until someone passed by outside and bent down for the purse. At that moment, we pulled the purse under the gate to the inside with the string and enjoyed the probably stupid face of the person thus fooled. We played this many, many times and developed a tremendous fun doing it.

We sometimes "excelled" verbally as well. For example, on a walk with Diet and our dog Tell. With him, we stopped on the way to the Woog Valley at a bench where two older ladies were sitting. Tell sniffed and - yes maybe even - lifted his leg. One of the ladies got angry: "That's the youth of today!" - To which Diet replied: "That's the youth of yesterday!"

Of course, there were also rainy days. We children played "Mensch ärgere Dich nicht" (a German board game similar to Ludo), "Fang den Hut" (Catch the Hat) and similar games. For the adults, patience games were often on the agenda, of which there were many variations. After the Nazis came to power, Uncle Adolf often combined it with political jokes. Depending on how many piles were left, one had to reckon with a corresponding number of Hitler years. This proves how little one was prepared for the horror that later threatened. - But I'm getting ahead of myself.

Children and adults played "Bimbo" together. The rules were similar to the game of rummy, only instead of numbers and pictures, there were letters from which words were to be formed. Each letter had a numerical value. Bimbo was very popular. Verses were used to advertise. For example, "Grandfather, father, mother and child are completely enthusiastic about Bimbo". Uncle Adolf "invented" a personal advertisement and used one of his favorite words for it, which for inexplicable reasons was "Schnuddel". He rhymed "The nose runs for Muddel, with Bimbo she forgets the Schnuddel".

Holidays in Königstein also meant many out-of-house activities. The most important was the walk to the swimming pool, which took about a quarter of an hour. You could take the thick or the thin path, and almost every time there was a discussion at the fork about which was now the better way. Sometimes the groups separated and took different paths. Öms was often there as a supervisor and usually carried a parasol. In the swimming pool itself, there were two separate pools for swimmers and non-swimmers. In the large and deep one, a beam swam in the middle, on which and around which a lot of fun was had. So that we children could participate in these joys, we were soon taken on the "line" by the lifeguard to later "swim free". I did that too, but the "free" always remained limited. Why, I still don't know today. At least it was enough to join in the frolicking at the beam. Speaking of swimming skills. With amazed admiration, I watched what Mr. Westfal, the father of our playmate Herwart, did in the water. He moved his hands barely visibly, apparently kept his legs still, and thus "stood" more or less motionless in the water. He never went under! And I couldn't comprehend it.

An out-of-house activity less popular with us children was going for walks. We dodged it whenever we could. But it rarely succeeded. It sometimes came to regular hikes, for example to the Altkönig or even to the Feldberg. We were more inclined when it only went to the Billtalhöhe. Such walks were brightened up by little games on the way. So there was the beaver game and the little guy game. In the beaver game, the one who first saw a man with a beard had to shout "beaver" loudly. He then got points, with the number of points depending on the type of "beaver". Of course, a full beard was worth more than just a goatee. Heated discussions arose about how many points a mustache should be worth. The decision was difficult, because how many types of mustaches are conceivable! In contrast, the little guy game had fewer variations. "Little guy" was a man with a bald head. But how should a man be evaluated who wears a cap or a hat, but where everything else indicates that he is a "little guy"? Uncle Adolf and Rollo were enthusiastic supporters of these two games.

We became more mobile when bicycles were also available. They were our own. How they came to Königstein back then, I don't know. I didn't think about it at the time, of course. The most fun was to race around the tennis court like mad and see who had the nose in front this time. Paper pieces were attached to the rear wheels with clothespins to produce a racing car-like noise. In between, we stopped at the "pit lane" to check our bikes, lubricate them and - rarely - clean them.

For some apparently militaristic reasons, Diet and I began one day to dig a deep trench in front of the rabbit hutches of gardener Reul, which we declared a trench. There was also a "dugout" covered with boards. Since it was too laborious to fill in the trench again, it remained for years. Much more civilian, on the other hand, were our houses that we had set up together with Maria in two groups of trees, although we were a few years younger then. The fir trees that had grown over decades provided good visual protection from the outside.

Again and again, the walk to the castle was an attraction, especially when we were smaller. The path first led through the Woog Valley, then the ascent to the castle began. There was a lot of old masonry and, above all, a "dark" passage. It was a matter of honor not to miss this passage on a castle visit. Of course, we always climbed the tower, although less because of the magnificent view, but rather because of the race up the many worn steps. The castle was illuminated once in summer at night, combined with fireworks. The spa administration wanted to offer something special to its guests. We also experienced castle festivals, performed by amateur actors, in which of course the Hessian dialect came through. Classic for us and much quoted later was the saying: "My daughter a French bride! Oh, was I blind then, oh where did I have my eyes!". What was it about? Well, quite simply: After World War I, a German father had discovered that his daughter had a relationship with a French soldier of the occupation force and lamented this.

Speaking of occupation force. After World War I, Königstein was first occupied by the French and then by the English. The English marched every Sunday with, as they say so beautifully, "ringing music" through the town to church. This was always an attraction. In front of the column, the drum major with a long colorful stick, which he sometimes skillfully whirled through the air, and next to the troops the officers with their small, riding crop-like sticks typical for the English army. Many people watched. Kromse, however, turned away every time out of national sentiment, when he, which rarely happened, was in town at this time. This was remarkable, because he was basically as anglophile as one can hardly imagine. But his attitude was understandable, because the war had been over for years, and the troops had no other function than to intimidate the Germans so that the reparation payments would continue. The role as a protective power, as was the case many years after World War II in the Federal Republic (intended against the Soviet Union), did not exist at that time. The occupation only ended in 1930. The "Freedom Stone" was set in the Woog Valley for this.

An attractive street event was the procession taking place on Corpus Christi Day. Since Hesa was strictly Catholic, she took us along to Kirchstraße for years to follow the spectacle. As far as I remember, we never protested against it. When we were older, there was no more Hesa and correspondingly no more going to the procession. Other church activities were not to be noted in the surroundings of Ölmühlweg, as far as I remember.

The way into "the city" or into "the town" otherwise only led to shopping. We children gladly accompanied Öms especially when it went to the butcher's shop Schwager. Mrs. Schwager greeted us with her deep voice and with the words "Toch, Frau Doktor", and then we got a few slices of delicious meat sausage. We particularly enjoyed when it then went on to Café Greiner. The possibility of an ice cream or cake tempted, possibly also combined with a cup of cocoa. However, the shopping trips did not always go so harmlessly. When Rollo once accompanied Öms and greeted by Öms, he insulted the person concerned with the words: "You crooked carrion, what do you have to greet my grandmother for!". It was no sacrifice for us to go a little further to the small shop of widow Grandpierre. There was simply everything there. That was interesting, but even more interesting was the lady's beard that surrounded her chin. Only Aunt Annchen could compete with her in this regard. However, there was a significant difference in that Mrs. Grandpierre did not kiss us, while Aunt Annchen's kisses scratched.

The main crystallization points of the extended family were, of course, the meals. In the large dining room, one sat in changing, but usually large numbers around a square table, at the head Öms, who directed everything in this house, without at least us children noticing that it was being directed. What Öms radiated was a quiet authority. Perhaps there is no such thing, but here it was present.

The food was served by the maid Käthe Westenberger, a native of Königstein who belonged to the household for decades, after it had arrived in a small elevator from the basement kitchen. The large number of participants naturally required that certain rules of the game had to be observed. What was put on the table was eaten. Diet still complains today that Kromse urged him not only to eat spinach but also to finish what was on the plate. Another rule of the game concerned the dessert. The cook Christine was known for her truly delicious red fruit jellies, made from berries freshly delivered from the field. The red fruit jelly was served with milk. Now there were two milk suppliers, the milkman and the milk maid, who delivered alternately. On one milk delivery, there was always still a bit of cream floating on top, on the other not. It was frowned upon to skim the cream off the milk for dessert, but we often tried it anyway. It was also forbidden to dig a hole, a cave, or even a passage in the served red fruit jelly, which was firm due to gelatin and turned out onto a serving plate. Even our children's hint that this was the dark passage of the castle didn't help.

The small meals, like breakfast or afternoon tea, were taken on the terraces, in bad weather on the covered one. The problem was the wasps, which arrived in swarms. Therefore, especially at breakfast, a bottle of raspberry syrup was set up. If a wasp crawled into the neck, another danger was already eliminated. Opa particularly distinguished himself in this hunt. He lay in wait with the Frankfurter Zeitung and accelerated the fall of the wasps into the deadly liquid with short blows at the right time.

Opa was a passionate hunter in general. He practiced hunting near Wetzlar. The area was called Altenberg. As a member of the supervisory board of the Buderus company in Wetzlar, Opa had the privilege of being picked up and brought back by a company car for hunting. For us children, it was important to be there at least at the departure. Because firstly, a car was something special for us and secondly, we had seen that the driver - he was called "chauffeur" back then - once drank from the bottle. That was something unheard of, as it was forbidden to us. We then always lurked for this to happen again, which of course it did.

Opa usually brought back killed game from the hunt, hares and deer. Christine prepared delicious meals from them. But Opa - like probably many or even most hunters - never ate game. He was then served something else.

On the topic of "Altenberg", another little story comes to mind. The hunting ground there had a forester named Erb. A strapping man devoted to Opa. When his wife died, Öms thought she had to go along to express the family's condolences. After she had done so, Erb's answer came: "She could have made herself scarce earlier!" And for that, Öms had come along!

Since we're just with Opa, it's natural to continue with him, and again a car is involved. Always, when he had business to do in Frankfurt, Mr. Ohlenschläger was ordered with his rental car of American make. This car also fascinated us. For the passengers sitting in the back, you could fold back part of the bodywork, which always happened in nice weather. It was the height of feelings to drive once with Opa to Frankfurt and back and, among other things, to experience how Mr. Ohlenschläger and the car mastered the steep Sodener mountain.

Opa was an enthusiastic card player with a focus on bridge. Hardly was dinner over, he was already waiting a bit restlessly for the card table to be set up in the middle of the hall. And then it started, while we children were ordered to the Yellow Room to play or even upstairs to go to bed. From above, we often followed in our pajamas what was happening downstairs. Opa had a very skilled bridge player in Kromse. Kromse, lacking the Wannsee golf club after our move to Freiburg, was more often in Königstein, but always had a golf club with him, with which he practiced "dry". Öms was probably also quite good as a bridge player, but Mux was less good or even bad and was often criticized. She played more or less out of a sense of duty and gladly stepped back in favor of others when they were in the house. She and Uncle Adolf were more for laying out patience games.

Once again Opa. He actually never stood out particularly, but fit well into the community, which, however, also left him a lot of his own space. That probably also belonged to Öms' direction. He went for many walks with the small Scotch terrier Stupps, which the family had once given him for Christmas. Opa had a great sense of humor and could enjoy the same jokes or funny incidents over and over again even later. For example, he told me repeatedly over the years how I, as a small child, had burst into loud screaming when he once appeared from the bathroom in a shirt without a collar after shaving. Those were the shirts back then to which separate collars were buttoned on. This was done with a "collar button", which often fell to the floor and was then hardly findable due to its tininess.

A very personal experience for me fell out of the general, mostly cheerful frame. I was about 5 years old when all signs of appendicitis appeared in me. The parents were visiting friends in Switzerland, but that was unimportant because I was in the best care. Mr. Ohlenschläger and his car were activated and transported me straight to the Marienkrankenhaus in Frankfurt, where Dr. Flörken operated on me. Strange, it's been so long, but I still know all the names: that of the hospital, that of the surgeon, and even the place in Switzerland where the parents had traveled, Vulpera. The Viennese friends Böhler had a house there. - By the way, the then very respected Dr. Flörken left quite a large scar on my stomach!

But not only such things led from Königstein to Frankfurt and back again. For many years, the Römerberg festivals were enticing. A stage was set up in front of the historic Römerberg building in the old town. In front of it on the square were stands for the spectators. The performances took place at night, all classical pieces like "Fiesco", "Hamlet", "Wallenstein". Of the Wallenstein trilogy, the Römerberg was of course particularly suitable for "Wallenstein's Camp" and "The Piccolomini". All very impressive and still stuck in my memory to this day. Also Kromse's saying, which made the "Piccolomini" into the "Pinkolomini"!

So far a collection of what there was to live and experience in Königstein. In today's psychological terminology, the question may finally arise: where was closeness, and how was it perceived? I doubt whether anyone thought about it at that time. We children with our not very subtle mental horizons certainly not. But the adults hardly either. It wasn't asked, rather closeness was simply practiced.

The atmosphere in Königstein can be summarized in three words that all end in "keit": Fröhlichkeit (cheerfulness), Gemeinsamkeit (togetherness), Selbstverständlichkeit (naturalness). Also probably Dankbarkeit (gratitude), but from the perspective of us children, that was less tangible, although certainly present in the adults. First, cheerfulness. The whole ambiance at Ölmühlweg created the basis for a cheerfulness that was simply there. Then: togetherness. We belonged together, there was no individualism. Together we were cheerful - and of course sometimes not, which, however, has no contours in my childhood memory. Further: naturalness. This term must be seen from two sides. On the one hand, we children - and probably some adults - found it natural to come to Königstein in the summer and live there as if at home, only probably more carefree. But this word had its decisive meaning from another perspective, namely not from the perspective of the takers, but from the perspective of the givers. Öms and Opa and their entire environment conveyed to everyone who had the pleasure of being with them a feeling that what was conveyed was natural, just as it can be in a family when everyone pulls together.

And that was Königstein over many years, before first frost fell over the idyll and then the bitter ice age came, which brought Königstein to an end and decimated the family.


13. 1932 - From Berlin to Freiburg

1932 was an important year. For my parents and me, it meant saying goodbye to familiar surroundings, people, and environment. For me, it was probably a more painful experience than for my parents. At least, that's how it seemed to me in my oh-so-wise, yet still childish, foresight. After all, my parents had made the decision, not me! That I was thoroughly, even decisively, mistaken proved to be the case very quickly in Freiburg. And as for my parents, at ten years old, I naturally had no idea what bundle of considerations had brought about this total change. "Naturally" no idea? Yes, because I can't remember being extensively informed about internal matters, which would repeat itself. It didn't bother me then or later; in fact, I didn't even realize it. It wasn't until much later in marriage that I understood the importance of communication and openness.

From today's perspective, the political situation at the time might have played a role. After all, 1932 was a year of political crisis. The party dispute had strongly polarized into left and right. The Communists and the National Socialists engaged in bloody battles - especially in Berlin - resulting in deaths. And the number of Reichstag seats held by the NSDAP had increased dramatically. Anti-Semitism was already clearly evident. Mux was baptized, but she was the daughter of Jewish parents. So, what seemed more logical than to leave Berlin for a predominantly Catholic small town?

Nevertheless, I don't believe today that such political considerations played an important role. Kromse was nationally minded. My parents voted for the German National People's Party (DNVP), which had already made certain overtures to the NSDAP in 1932 and later openly joined forces with it. I've already mentioned Kromse's tentative feelers towards the NSDAP. He was never a Nazi, of course, but he liked the patriotic aspect. He never read Hitler's "Mein Kampf", not even parts of it. He never expected that something so evil was brewing, let alone for his own family. When later, what Hitler had already written down in the 1920s became increasingly clear, the hangover, horror, and total rejection came, which he maintained with all consequence until the end. - For whatever reasons, the move to Freiburg was decided, carried out in late 1932, and turned out to be exactly right, as already mentioned.

I hardly noticed any of the preparations for the move. As every year, Königstein was on the agenda. At the beginning of the summer holidays, I was taken out of the Berlin school, and Mux and I traveled with our dog Tell to Königstein. I was parked there, Mux probably only temporarily. I don't remember exactly, but she surely organized the move together with Kromse. They also had some things to do in Freiburg with the gradual completion of the house. The construction company Denz was reliable, but now and then they had to check on what was happening.

My stay in Königstein was longer than usual this time, and I didn't mind. I had been deregistered from school in Berlin but not yet registered in Freiburg, as the house wasn't finished. To not completely waste time, they had organized a bit of private tutoring for me. A trainee teacher from Leipzig from Uncle (actually Great-uncle) Professor Alfred Doren's circle was engaged for this. The lessons took place in the garden when the weather was good. What could there be to complain about!

But time flew by, and the house in Freiburg approached completion. On October 1st, it was time. "Goodbye" Königstein and "hello" Freiburg. We couldn't move in right away, so we initially stayed at the "Salmen" hotel. When I say "we", that of course includes our faithful Sofie. She was and remained fully integrated into the family and felt that way too. Grandma Maurer came later.

The "Salmen" had been recommended to my parents, and they had already stayed there when they were in Freiburg during the house construction. Mindful of Berlin distances, they had taken a taxi at the station upon their first arrival and given the "Salmen" as their destination. They hadn't noticed the taxi driver's bewilderment, but they were surprised when the taxi stopped in front of the "Salmen" after about 500 meters. For them, this was, so to speak, the appropriate entry into Freiburg!

The "Salmen" was what one would call "solidly middle-class" and excellently run by the Kiechle family. This family included two daughters, at that time just as young and innocent as I was. Later, my friends and I learned - not from personal experience! - that the Kiechle girls were considered anything but "solidly middle-class", but rather "wild", as it was called back then.

Final touches were being made to the house. The wallpapering and upholstery firm Baldenweck played an important role in this. I still vividly remember its boss, hence probably the somewhat unusual name. His masterpiece was a sofa specially made for the living room, which to this day remains unparalleled in style and size. I don't know how long we lived in the "Salmen". But it was probably only a short time, because very quickly the house and its surroundings came into my consciousness and remained in my memory.


14. The House at Wintererstrasse 69

The house was finished; Wintererstrasse 69 in Freiburg-Herdern. It was a house we moved into; not an apartment like in Berlin. A bit of the Königstein feeling might have arisen. But it was different. Here, nothing was shared with others. Here, we were home alone. And to reiterate: we, that was with Sofie, and there was also a maid who was just as integrated. We, that was soon expanded to include Grandma, Kromse's mother. Whether she was integrated? I don't know, but I doubt it. 79 years old, and then to be transplanted, that can hardly go well. She could hardly feel at home in Freiburg, especially as age-related symptoms became increasingly noticeable.

What did the house look like, how was it divided, how was it inhabited? In the first photo, it appears quite pointed with its three floors and the pointed roof. This impression is underlined, however, by the bareness in front and around it. A lot had to grow there first. Later pictures then give a different, more balanced impression. The upper half of the house was clad with dark brown wood. If I remember correctly, this was meant to pay some homage to the South German building style. Whatever the reason for the cladding, it was in the right place, because otherwise the impression of pointedness would have prevailed. "South German" also were the colorful shutters, a nice idea from the architect and/or builder.

Ground floor, first and second floor, above that an attic, below a cellar. Let's go through the house. You entered a small hallway with a wardrobe on the right and a toilet on the left, also on the right the entrance to the kitchen. Straight ahead through a glass door into the stairwell with a spacious landing, left through a door to the cellar stairs and straight ahead into the large living room with wide windows facing south and a view of the garden. A door led to the left onto a small terrace. At the end of the living room, offset to the right (without a door) was the dining room with a door to the pantry, which led to the right into the kitchen.

I said "stairwell". That may sound exaggerated, but the building style of the time had a lot of space for the stairs. And so it was here. The stairs to the first floor wound to the right and landed again on a spacious area, a kind of landing, from which - immediately to the left - was the parents' bathroom and immediately further right a large parents' bedroom, which had an extra alcove with a desk for Mux. Straight ahead was Kromse's work and midday nap room with a "desk", i.e. a board on two trestles, an indescribably deep and comfortable giant armchair and a wardrobe. On the wall hung a picture of Frederick the Great. To the right of the landing was the door to Grandma's double room. First you entered her living room with old furniture and could then - without a door - go on to her bedroom. The bedroom had running cold and hot water. The windows faced the front.

From today's perspective, it's striking: one bathroom for at least 6 people. Otherwise, only running water in all rooms where people slept. Who bathed how often? The parents were privileged and had their turn every day, although not always using the bathtub, which was large, stood in the room (not tiled as is usual today) and was equipped with some sponges that Kromse loved. What applied to the rest of the family? Saturday was a kind of habit, but I don't remember who had their turn how often. In general, the principle was: running cold and hot water (the latter was already something of a luxury) with a washbasin and first one leg in, then the other and then with the washcloth here and there. How did Grandma manage at nearly 80 years old? Probably only very partially.

One floor higher were my large room facing the garden and the two small girls' rooms that flowed into each other (all with running cold and hot water) as well as a small guest room and a small toilet.

From the second floor, stairs led to a spacious attic, where everything that was no longer needed was stacked. How I loved to go on voyages of discovery in boxes, crates, and old suitcases later on!

Below the ground floor in the cellar were the heating system, the coal supplies, the laundry room, a storage cellar with preserves in jars, wine and other things. Also a low cellar room without windows and without screed. Old boxes were stored there with all sorts of contents.

"Laundry room", that didn't mean the presence of an electrically operated, possibly even automatic, washing machine. Such a thing didn't exist for a long, long time. Instead, there was a large tub that was heated from below with coke or wood. The laundry was boiled or at least heated there and then scrubbed or rubbed on a washboard. Something similar applied to the state of technology for the heating system. No trace of oil or gas heating. No, coke had to be shoveled into a large stove and the appropriate combustion - with more or less underfire - had to be checked again and again. The hot water supply was at a high level even by today's standards. In the laundry room hung a large boiler that was electrically heated and supplied water to the whole house.

The impression is not deceiving. Everything was generously laid out, and there was a lot of space. Nevertheless, it should be noted that savings had to be made. Not to forget, it was the year 1932, deflation, crisis, mass unemployment. If I remember correctly, the house construction had cost 32,000 marks, an unimaginably small amount today, for which you can get about a VW Passat in D-marks today.

Where the parents got the money to finance the house, I can only guess. It wasn't talked about in my presence back then, and later - surprisingly! - I didn't think to ask. It simply wasn't important to me.

The house had a large front garden, through which a path led to the entrance. A lawn, a few bushes, flowers along the path, later also monthly strawberries, which you could snack on for weeks on the way to the house entrance. This part of the garden was only for decoration.

Behind the house, things got serious. First there was only a small slope with a rock garden, but then there was a meadow, and a considerable part was reserved for vegetables and fruits of all kinds. This was Mux's domain. Kromse also took care of it sporadically, but was responsible for the water supply, which was a lot of work, because the summers in Freiburg were very hot.

At the very back of the garden there were four poles to hang up the laundry. Two poles with a round pole over them were meant for beating out carpets. Much more often, however, this was used for football purposes. Can you imagine a more ideal goal? - But I'm getting ahead of myself and already revealing a little bit of a wonderful youth.

It may seem strange why I describe the locations of the house in such detail. This is important because during the war and post-war years, numerous shifts in the use of the rooms occurred, which can only be understood from a knowledge of the location of the rooms.


15. ... and its Surroundings

Just as important as the house was, of course, its surroundings, in which one lives just as much. First of all: Wintererstrasse was located somewhat outside the suburb of Herdern on the hill. 10 minutes away from the nearest tram stop (Herdern terminus). To the station it was downhill, from the station steeply uphill. The grocery stores were distributed about the same distance as the tram, so no problem. To the city center, you took the tram for just under 10 minutes. So here too, everything was within reach. Freiburg was manageable as a small city.

In the immediate vicinity, there were single-family houses on one side, on the other side there was only an old small house with antediluvian sanitary conditions, i.e., an outhouse outside in the shed and only one running cold water tap in the kitchen. It used to serve as the residence of the manager of the brickyard, which processed the existing clay soil at this location. It was no coincidence that the place was called "Hungerberg" (Hunger Mountain) because of this soil condition. Probably it wasn't the official name, but it had stuck even after the brickyard operations ceased.

This small house with its inhabitants and their relatives became a crystallization point of my personal environment for years. There lived the leg-amputee shoemaker master Willi Zipfel with his wife and two sons. Willi, a few years younger than me, and Karl, a few years older. It was said that Karl was the illegitimate son of Mrs. Zipfel and a Russian prisoner of war. But he had the name Zipfel, and no one cared about any possible "backstory."

And now it becomes difficult for me to continue the description. Should I go into details now or later? A wealth of memories is pushing to be written down. But this is just about the surroundings for now, so restraint is called for!

However, the Zipfel relatives, all from Mrs. Zipfel's clan, i.e., from her three sisters, belong to the surroundings. The most important for me were, of course, those with whom I spent my time playing in various ways. The nephew Ernst Keisinger, about my age, must be mentioned first, because he lived only a few minutes away. Then Walter Räpple, also about the same age, but living further away. Finally, Albert Bürgel, quite a bit older and already at the beginning of a professional career, married to a Zipfel niece.

The house on the other side belonged to the childless couple Mie, he a professor of chemistry at the University of Hamburg, she equipped with a lady's beard of unbelievable intensity. There was a good neighborly relationship with the two, but no social closeness. One house further lived the Facklam sisters, with whom a friendship developed, especially for Mux.

Opposite on the street side, it went steeply downhill, so from the perspective of that time, no possibility of erecting a house. Thus, our house was quite freely and generously located with good distances to the neighbors or with unbuildable opposite. Ideal for living.


16. Settling In and Perspectives

So, the house was finished and furnished. Now it was time to live in it, around it, and in the wider surroundings of the Herdern district and the city of Freiburg. I have described the surroundings in the last chapter. There were - especially for me - good opportunities to connect. It probably wasn't difficult for the parents either to make initial connections with the neighbors. But an extended circle of acquaintances or even friends had to be slowly built up.

It was natural to start with connections that existed from earlier times. First, there was the couple von Thüna. He, Rudolf (called Tim), was the director of the Mercedes-Benz branch in Freiburg. She was called Edwina, but everyone called her Pu. The Thünas were known from Berlin, although not close friends there. In Freiburg, however, a very close friendship and shared experiences in joy and sorrow grew. The couple had two sons: Carl-August (called Uz), 6 years older than me, and Stefan (called Spatz), 2 years older than me.

The Kießling family belonged to a completely different environment. He was one of the "comrades" from Kromse's time as a soldier. I know nothing of any profession, only that he had formerly been a major. Of his wife, I only remember her maiden name: von Friedeburg. Because her brother was later a high-ranking naval officer and signed the capitulation of the German Wehrmacht in 1945. This couple was important to me only because they had two sons, the older of whom was in the same school as me, one class higher.

With that, the keyword "school" has been dropped. I was enrolled at the Friedrich Gymnasium, the FG, which, like the Mommsen Gymnasium in Berlin, was dedicated to humanistic education. So I could pick up where I had left off in Berlin. It was also advantageous that the school was only 15 minutes away on foot, and later, of course, much faster to reach by bicycle.

I came into a class that consisted of sons of Freiburg citizens and sons from families from the countryside, mostly farmers' sons, whose parents expected that with their higher education they would have a better future later than toiling in the fields. These out-of-town classmates lived in a boarding school strictly run by a Catholic priest. For many parents, the desire that their son might one day become a priest probably played a role.

Freiburg was predominantly Catholic, as was the majority of the class. Religious education was taught separately, and there was also a certain rivalry between the two religions, something I didn't know at all from the very secular Berlin. There was a special arrangement for me. We belonged to the Evangelical Lutheran congregation, while the Evangelical Freiburgers were Evangelical Reformed. The difference is certainly not so serious that it would have harmed me to participate in the Evangelical Reformed religious education at school. But the Evangelical Lutheran pastor was particular and gave his religious instruction on one afternoon at the parsonage. At school, I enjoyed a free period when the others had religion.

I could be satisfied with the class. I was well received, only had some difficulties with the Freiburg dialect. Although I didn't speak with a Berlin accent, I did have a tongue-twisting in that direction, which led, for example, in the hot summer, to my classmates raving about "hitzfrei" and wanting to die laughing when I somewhat stiltedly spoke of "hitzefrei". Reciting Alemannic poems by Johann Peter Hebel also caused me great difficulties and provoked gales of laughter in the class.

If I had thought I could casually continue at school where I had left off in Berlin, it initially proved to be an illusion. It quickly became apparent that the FG applied stricter standards and was further advanced with the teaching curriculum. While in Berlin we were allowed to enjoy outdoor lessons in the Grunewald in nice weather, different conditions prevailed in the classroom in Freiburg. My grades then slipped from the high Berlin level to a level that I - even from today's perspective - would consider appropriate for me. I was slightly better than the middle and maintained this level with slight fluctuations up and down over the years.

What I did outside of school was mostly in the Zipfel environment. Details are reserved for a later chapter. But first, I was entrusted to another community. The two Kießling sons belonged to the Protestant youth, the "Bible Circle," called BK. This designation is misleading, however, as it was an organization comparable to the "Boy Scouts". Just like the "Boy Scouts," we came together for evening meetings, sang songs to the guitar, undertook field games, made "trips" with tent camps, and much more. All of this, of course, with an Evangelical Christian prefix, i.e., Bible readings at the evening meetings and in the tent.

The older Kießling son suggested that I should join the BK. Back then, one said he "recruited" me. And the parents thought it was a good idea. So I landed, then 11 years old, in the BK. and I never regretted it, because I got to know a good and very communal togetherness there. We sang a lot at the evening meetings. That was important for us. Some songs are still well in my ear, and I'm still annoyed today when I get stuck in the melody or the lyrics and don't know how to continue. We went "on trips" with a backpack on our back. There were nights in tents with a fire in the middle. Such tents, where the smoke could escape, were called "Kote" and had to be set up very professionally. There were field games with 2 parties, where everyone was marked with a colored woolen thread on the upper arm, some red, others blue. Whoever had the woolen thread torn from their sleeve was considered "dead" and was no longer allowed to continue playing. We felt like quasi-Indians, snuck up on each other and did whatever else was necessary to surprise the opponent. Not that I was involved in many trips, field games, or tent camps, because ten-year-olds stay at home when the big ones get down to business. But the fact that I could be there at all was already something. I liked the spear game best. On a playing field divided into two halves, two parties faced each other. We threw at each other with bamboo poles whose tips were blunted with padding. If an opponent was hit, he had to drop out. It was fun to see the "spears" flying towards you and then to knock them away with your own "spear". When the team leaders chose their parties, it was an honor to be chosen early. All in all, I have good memories of the time in the BK.

The leader of the Freiburg group, Paul Bornhäuser (called Pflolle) was a pastor's son and a high school graduate at the FG. His brother Gerhard (called Gersti) also belonged to the school and was 2 years younger. There were other BK members at the FG, and during the long break, we always met at a particular tree. Pflolle was a wonderful role model for us dwarfs. I can still see him in front of me. He later fell in the war when he tried to rescue a wounded man from the line of fire. On the way to the evening meetings, he took me on the front bar of his bicycle. I didn't have my own yet.

I have already summarized the time in the BK here. It lasted 1-2 years and ended when the entire youth movement became state youth, i.e., Hitler Youth.

An important reason why the parents had decided on Freiburg was that there was a university here. They had planned from the beginning to register as auditors and attend selected lectures. While Mux had decided on the philosophical direction and had the famous Professor Heidegger in mind, Kromse's focus was clearly on history. For many years, he attended lectures on various historical directions, especially church and military history, and gave presentations in seminars. This also resulted in acquaintances, which in some cases developed into friendships. Such as the friendship with Mrs. Neumann and her student daughter Lilo, who both visited us for many years. Lilo married and moved to Africa, which astonished us very much, because she screamed and fled at the encounter with even the smallest spider. The insects in Africa may have been considerably larger!

While I found acceptance in the community of the BK, this component had an incomparably larger dimension for Kromse. As an old soldier who had only been prevented by an injury from continuing his officer's career to higher ranks, and always nationally minded, he now decided to join the "Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten" (Steel Helmet, League of Front-Line Soldiers). This happened, and from then on he was "Comrade Maurer" in this organization. This also included a kind of uniform in field gray and boots, which he wore for it. The Steel Helmets met regularly. What they did then, I don't know, but I assume that firstly they talked - probably mostly raved - about old times and secondly discussed politics. In the "Stahlhelm," former enlisted men and officers met as equals, and it was certainly a good social interaction. Kromse always had a particularly good rapport with simple people, which was reciprocated. He would certainly have become a good officer, popular with his men. So it was also in the "Stahlhelm". I experienced this with a "comrade" who was unemployed and came to us to earn additional money by doing the garden. This was not a subordinate relationship, but an absolutely equal one. The man often brought his little son Siegfried with him and scolded him when he didn't obey with the words: "Siegfriedle, come here, I'll tan your hide!" - This later became a catchphrase for us.

This somewhat militaristic vibration in our Freiburg settling-in received an additional note through the professional designation that Kromse officially had to give from time to time. He quite correctly called himself a "merchant," for this was the occupation he had pursued for by far the largest part of his life. In Freiburg, however, one could not make much of this kind of profession, which would have been self-evident in Hamburg, for example. "Merchant," that was a person who stood behind the counter in the vegetable shop around the corner or in other shops. No, Mr. Maurer could not be a merchant! So the questioning about his profession continued, and it turned out that Kromse had once been an officer. Although only for a short time, nobody was interested in that. They pounced on the statement "Captain (ret.)," and that's what it remained until the end. Kromse was called the "Herr Hauptmann" in many places. The whole thing took on comical features when this rank was not enough for some people. It became "Herr Major," and when Mux one day received a bill from the baker Langenbach with the address "Frau General Maurer," she sent the bill back with the remark that she was not that!


17. Opa's Birthday and Politics

That was the beginning in Freiburg. From my perspective, everything went smoothly and in a way that we could be happy about: about the good start and about promising prospects to continue like this. I hope I have more or less accurately represented the parents' point of view as well. I can't ask either of them anymore today. Once again, I feel regret that I know too little. Of course, as a child, I was largely focused on myself, but later I could have shown a bit more interest in essential contexts of the past. Or am I too sensitive about this and unfair to myself? Because the considerations directed at this or that point only come to me now, as I delve intensively into the past. And earlier than now, I would never have found the time to deal so intensively with things long past. - Be that as it may, quite a bit has stuck and will suffice to conceive the coming chapters in a way that satisfies me.

For example, it's anchored in my memory that with the move to Freiburg into our own house, Kromse also planned to have dinners in a kind of English style. After all, he had been a fan of English style since his extended stay in London. Of course, no butler could be present in Freiburg to arrange things, but the idea that one might dress for dinner and whatever else seemed to have settled in him. However, reality then very quickly overtook this - and perhaps other - plans.

I was the trigger for this, because I used the new free environment until the last minute or even second to free myself from any constraints. My whereabouts, whenever it wasn't raining and we could romp outside, was the neighboring property, where the Zipfel youth lured. So we often kicked the ball around for so long that the loud and increasingly angry call for me simply could no longer be ignored, and I appeared at the dinner table at a run with dirt on various parts of body and clothing. Usually, there was only time to wash hands at most. Dinner was indeed taken together, but it lacked quite a bit of English dignity. From today's perspective, I must say that it wouldn't have fit into the environment if practiced differently than it now was. Kromse then no longer tried to enforce it.

So we had settled in well when, after about a quarter of a year, Opa's 70th birthday on January 15, 1933, approached. Why not celebrate this birthday in Freiburg, with the Maurers in their new house? This must have been decided early on, because there was a lot to prepare, to compose, and to rehearse. Many members of the extended family were involved in a performance and had roles to learn. Of course, it was about Opa's multifaceted environment. I remember a hunting scene, for which an quite extensive fir tree was specially brought in a huge pot. Dieter and I appeared as the Ajaxes: the Telamonian and the Locrian. I always hated to perform such shows, but could never escape when family celebrations were coming up. Usually it was with cousin Dieter, as at a round birthday of Öms, where we mimicked two balls of wool.

Yes, and now Opa's seventieth. Already a big deal, not only for the family but also for the German economy. Opa was no longer on the board of Commerzbank, but still on a considerable number of supervisory boards and other committees. His name carried weight in the German economy.

But first, of course, it was about the family. From Frankfurt came Opa, Öms, Uncle Adolf and the Berndts, from Leipzig Uncle Alfred and Aunt Annchen. As far as I remember, friends and acquaintances were not present. I don't know for sure, but it would have corresponded to Opa's modesty in any case.

He couldn't prevent the numerous congratulations from the business world, which mostly arrived in the form of telegrams. The gifts didn't take the detour via Freiburg but were sent directly to Frankfurt, where Opa, although no longer on the board of Commerzbank but "only" on the supervisory board, still had his large official apartment.

It was a complete celebration and so very suitable to usher in the new era in our own house in Freiburg. No one suspected that only 15 days later, a completely different new era would begin. And when it was time, and the new era was recognizable as such, it was beyond the imagination of anyone in the family that the development would lead to the unimaginable.

What happened on January 30, 1933? Reich President Hindenburg had made Adolf Hitler Chancellor, and to celebrate this day, the NSDAP formations, i.e., SA and SS, marched in long columns with torches through the Brandenburg Gate past the Reich President's Palace, where Hindenburg and Hitler reviewed the parade from the balcony. But not only for the Nazi organizations was January 30 a holiday. Large parts of the population also felt a sense of liberation from the unsatisfactory back and forth of recent years with constant changes of chancellors and their governments. The economic crisis had led to millions of unemployed, the financial reparations after World War I had brought about a far-reaching dependence on the influx of foreign money, and so the relationship with foreign countries was extremely disturbed. The expectation now arising was based on the NSDAP program, which was full of promises. Of course, there was also opposition, which was primarily carried by the communist and social democratic parties, but the national line that Hitler and his people pursued in word and writing had brought the parties from far right to the center to his side.

Very quickly after January 30, which was officially called the "Day of National Uprising," an event followed that was seen by the population as extremely important and indicative of a better future based on national ideals, namely the "Day of Potsdam." On March 31, 1933, Hindenburg and Hitler shook hands in a state ceremony in the Potsdam Garrison Church at the sarcophagus of Frederick the Great, Hindenburg in the uniform of a field marshal general, Hitler in a cutaway with a top hat. The image of this handshake - Hitler with his head submissively bowed - was seen as a symbol of Hitler's subordination. The entire diplomatic corps, i.e., the representatives of foreign countries, were invited and followed the proceedings, which took place in a military, extremely spectacular setting.

I describe all this in such detail to make clear how perfectly a deceitful spectacle was staged here. It was only much later that people began to see through it. What happened in the family was very typical of this. Nationally attuned since time immemorial, the process was not only accepted but also welcomed. Of course, there was no television yet, and so people followed the events on the radio. Very early on, those responsible for radio broadcasts proved to be masters of their craft. Drumming and underscored by military music, even the approach and assembly were described, and no less the event itself. Goebbels, the later Minister of Propaganda, not only worked behind the scenes but even appeared as a reporter this time. The "Day of Potsdam" left a great impression. I remember that Kromse accompanied the description with comments like "now we'll show the foreigners." And nobody contradicted him. The illustrated magazines brought out special issues, and of course we got one. The pictures were overwhelming in their persuasiveness.

After that, life went on as before. The measures taken by the government initially left no negative traces in the family. There must have been quite a consensus, because I hung pictures of Hindenburg and Hitler in my room, which I certainly wouldn't have done at the age of 11 if there had been an oppositional mood in the parental home.

Hardly anyone in Germany, let alone a member of our family, including relatives, had properly read Hitler's book "Mein Kampf," which he had written in 1923 after the failed Munich Putsch during his fortress imprisonment in Landsberg. The impossible style, the bombastic formulations, made people break off the reading shortly after beginning. Later, much too late, it became clear that everything that was rotating in Hitler's criminal thoughts had already flowed into his book in 1923.

From today's perspective, the apparent blindness of the largest part of the population, including one's own family, is hardly understandable, especially not for later generations. Only those who experienced it can comprehend the behavior at that time. The approving attitude was supported by the success of the new measures, which initially became not only recognizable but also palpable, especially in the economic and later in the political sphere. After decades of humiliation, Germany was once again on the way to showing the world that it was to be reckoned with again, and the population was also doing increasingly better. Even today, old, incorrigible Nazis rave about how the construction of the autobahns brought thousands of unemployed people secure work incomes and helped families out of need.

How was the reaction of the Jewish fellow citizens? In general, I can't say anything about it, but the behavior of Opa and his friends - at least from my childish perspective - seems quite typical. There was no panic or an effort to emigrate as quickly as possible. Why should there be? They were German citizens. The men had fought for Germany in World War I, often receiving high decorations for their bravery and some had even been wounded. They were respected in their professions, whether in business, in healthcare, at universities. What reasons could there have been to deprive them of their economic basis, to persecute them or even to threaten their lives? When a very good friend of Opa's, a bank director in Zurich, offered him and his family to move to him, Opa declined. He felt quite safe. If Jews fled abroad at the beginning, it was mostly for political reasons. They were predominantly communist functionaries who feared for their safety and lives. Not only had the communist party, the KPD, always been the arch-enemy of the National Socialists, and fights between groups of both parties - especially in Berlin - had claimed numerous fatalities in the years before 1933. The Reichstag fire of February 27, 1933, set an additional sign. A mentally retarded Dutchman - Marius van der Lubbe - had been arrested as the arsonist, but the leaders of the KPD were accused of being the instigators of the crime. The KPD was banned and its functionaries hunted. To this day, it is not clear what's behind the Reichstag fire. The version that the Nazis themselves had set the fire to have a powerful handle against their main enemies is widespread and quite conclusive. But the proof for this is missing just as much as for the reading at the time that the KPD was to blame.


18. Life in Freiburg - Initially

We came to Freiburg in October 1932, and I stayed there until 1951. These 19 years were packed with experiences, and of course, there are periods within this timeframe that stood under particular circumstances. I will try to achieve a certain classification, but some things cannot be fixed to a specific period, but apply to one as well as to another. First, I will talk about the first and second year, with quite a few things that are also true for later.

I want to start with what affected me personally. What could be more appropriate than to begin with school, which in Freiburg was called the "Ship" (and the teachers the "Shippers"). So I had to fit into the Sexta of the FG, and as I've already said, that was very easy for me. Or to put it differently: my classmates made it very easy for me. But there were still the teachers I had to get to know, and they me. Professor Eiermann was our class teacher, responsible for Latin. We had him for many more years as class and Latin teacher. Perhaps the passage of time distorts the image I have retained of him. But I see him today as a kind soul of a man. A good educator and human being. He came by bicycle and mounted it as one probably did in the early days of cycling. His bike had a long thorn on the hub of the rear wheel. He would put one foot on it, push off several times with the other, and whoosh, he'd be in the saddle. Latin was taught from the same textbook as in Berlin, the "Ludus Latinus". So there was no excuse for me to be irritated by anything new.

We had German with Professor Borocco. I don't remember anything about the lessons, but about the teacher, that he was plagued by constant twitches. The reason: he had been buried alive in the World War, and his illness was a typical consequence of this war. So we got a foretaste of the cruelty in the world, but we 11- and 12-year-olds naturally didn't understand it. Not that we made fun of it. But we didn't grasp the tragedy.

Professor Hamel taught arithmetic and drawing. I remember that he used to beat students, specifically by hitting the back of their necks with his slightly curved hand. That was quite a strong measure, and we were all afraid of being among those affected, because the pain spread far into arms and legs. Fortunately, Hamel only accompanied us for a year or two.

Mr. Jung taught music and initially also gymnastics. He could still assert himself against the Sexta, but later it became difficult for him. The music lesson then became a hoot, and when he once wanted to play something on the oboe for us and got a nosebleed, the class howled. As adolescents, we became cruel. Years later, a music trainee teacher with the unfortunate name Zipf also experienced this. The class howled when he sang. Shortly afterwards, he gave up, whether for good or just with us, I don't know.

The real gymnastics teacher, whom we had until the end, was called Wolfsberger, nicknamed Wolfis. His lesson was then no longer called "gymnastics," but "sports." We couldn't do anything to him because he was a very tough guy. However, when we mockingly called him "Herr Professor," he didn't feel mocked at all, but rather flattered. His teaching was in the spirit of the four "f"s of Turnvater Jahn: "Frisch, fromm, fröhlich, frei" (fresh, pious, cheerful, free). Anyone who appeared with a bare upper body was in his good books from the start. I didn't participate in that, it was too cold for me. Otherwise, I found the lessons good and had fun. I managed the exercises on the apparatus to Wolfis' satisfaction. For others who showed less aptitude, it was not uncommon to hear: "Get down, you ox!" Now and then, Wolfis would sit at the out-of-tune piano, and we had to march in a circle in the gym, singing. Afterwards, he would open the door to the yard and shout: "Forest run, run!" Then we would jog around the schoolyard several times. Sometimes we managed to hide behind one of the trees to skip a round. Wolfis was also responsible for the sports games. In the yard, there was fistball, which we were allowed to play when he was in a good mood. The 100-meter run took place on the footpath next to the school and was accompanied by Wolfis with a stopwatch in hand. Once a week in the afternoon, there was football and handball. More on that later. - The section about Wolfis has become quite long. Why? Because I very much liked the sports lessons and also performed well there, which was reflected accordingly in the report card.

Of course, there were other teachers at the beginning, but none have remained in my memory. Therefore, apart from the already mentioned Wolfis, just a small preview of the following years. When we got Greek, a young teacher appeared, Professor Klein. He accompanied us for many years and was fully accepted by us. One of the first words we learned was "oligos" for "little". Unfortunately, the textbook also had "klein" (small) next to it. Since we, as total beginners, couldn't know that "klein" actually meant "mikros", we eagerly seized on "oligos", and so he had his nickname. Subsequent generations of students then adopted this nickname. I wonder if Oligos, who surely knew about his nickname, was bothered by the fact that his name was not correctly translated from Greek? - Oligos emphasized the important accents in Greek with striking hand movements. He was very nervous and had a tic from the beginning. He constantly tugged at his jacket. But we never amused ourselves about it in front of him.

Later, French was added, first with Borocco, then with Ries. He was the uncle of our classmate Hans Ries and had the unappetizing habit of pulling up phlegm in his throat with terrible loudness. This earned him the name "The Snotter". Parallel to the classical alliteration "Roland der Ries' am Rathaus zu Bremen..." (Roland the Giant at Bremen's Town Hall...) we declaimed "Ries der Rotzer am Rathaus zu Bremen rotzt Rhythmus und Reim" (Ries the Snotter at Bremen's Town Hall snots rhythm and rhyme).

I have fond memories of Mr. Doll, a young history teacher. Because of his youth, we first tried to terrorize him as well. However, he very quickly put us in our place, and we liked him very much - perhaps because of that? Unfortunately, we only had him for a very short time.

Other noteworthy teachers will appear later, but for now, let's leave it at that with the teachers. All in all, I felt quite comfortable in the school environment. It wasn't self-evident at all that I would be accepted so quickly. Classmates who weren't liked also felt it. We had one where that was the case, Walter Ries. He wore long stockings, which was an abomination to all of us, and he constantly had earwax. Moreover, he was totally unathletic. Poor guy, he didn't have it easy in the class. He later left our class.

As for me, I certainly wasn't a model student from the start. But I wasn't a troublemaker either. I joined in when teachers were being made fun of, but not in the torture. I held back, without protesting though. In everyday school life, my diligence was sufficient to avoid the danger of slipping too far in grades. Kromse then threatened with tutoring, and I wanted to avoid that at all costs. I managed to get by without tutoring until the end of my school days. That was important, because otherwise the free time, which was already limited by homework, would have been curtailed. It was best to learn just enough to get by. For this, it was necessary to do the homework permanently in order not to fall behind. At the beginning, Kromse "cooperated" with Latin, that is, he listened to my vocabulary, declined and conjugated with me. That was annoying because he was an old humanist, still knew a lot, and was quite relentless. The joint work therefore often ended in an outburst of tears on my part. But it took some time before he realized how unprofitable this kind of togetherness ultimately was. We then finally let it be. And no one regretted it. However, I had to at least report to him how the written work had turned out. Usually, this wasn't a big problem, because he could accept even a 3 or - in a good mood - even a 3-4. Worse grades, however, were already more difficult to sell to him.

Further activities on my part were directed towards being together in the BK. A classmate was also there, Gerhard Stratthaus. He became my first school friend and was also quickly integrated into the circle of friends on Wintererstrasse, which will be a chapter in itself with the heading "Zipfel & Co.".

The parents' everyday life consisted of continuing and intensifying what I have already reported about, and took place in the environment of friends and in connection with the university. In addition, Kromse also had the opportunity to play golf from Freiburg. Not directly in Freiburg, but in Gutach, about 20 km away, where the Gütermann family (of Gütermann's sewing silk) maintained a private course. Although we didn't have a car, Kromse occasionally found a ride, usually with Dr. Kraske, a doctor who was married to a born Gütermann.

Just like me, the parents enjoyed life in Freiburg and didn't pine for Berlin. Although I can't remember such a definite statement, anything else wouldn't fit with how they, how we lived in Freiburg from the beginning.

But I must add something very important. While I can't remember that we ever went to church in Berlin or belonged to a congregation, that was soon to change in Freiburg. Freiburg was predominantly Catholic, and the Protestant minority belonged to the Evangelical Reformed Church. In addition, there was the Evangelical Lutheran Church of the Redeemer at a distance of only 15 minutes' walk from us, which served a diaspora congregation and was also responsible for us. For whatever reasons, the parents discovered their heart for this congregation, this church and the associated pastor. We often attended services there together, I went to children's church, had religious instruction in the parsonage and was confirmed in the church. I still vividly remember walking to the Christmas services. The steps crunched in the snow, which was usually already quite high at that time. Everything was simply such that it had to remain in memory. The Christmas carols in the small, packed church are still in my ear, and I'm almost a little disappointed when it doesn't sound so "full-throated" and "wholehearted" in larger churches. We couldn't have guessed then that religion, faith, would become an incredible support especially for the parents in later bitter years. It probably all had to be and become this way.

But it wasn't just the parents and I who lived in this new house, but also our grandmother as well as Sofie and Maria. Let's start with Grandma. She came from Berlin and moved into her two rooms on the 1st floor. Apart from being present at all meals, she lived pretty much to herself, or else I have a false memory. Small peculiarities to note are that she liked to drink a small glass of cognac, but only French, with this she ate "petits fours", a very special small pastry. Both had to be exactly these, otherwise she was dissatisfied, and Kromse managed for years to get them for her. When French goods could no longer be imported due to a lack of foreign exchange, we filled German brandy into the last remaining French cognac bottle. This preference of hers was a bit of her continued life close to French customs. After all, she had spent many years in Alsace-Lorraine. And she was from a good family, too, the way she always sat ramrod straight at the table and knew what good manners were. That's why she didn't like at all that I made such intense friends with the Zipfel family. This environment seemed to her not appropriate for me in terms of social rank. She also criticized the table manners of classmates when I occasionally had them over for lunch.

To stay with Grandma for a bit longer, I'll talk about later years right away. I don't know when she started to become eccentric. It probably had to do with her declining hearing ability, which developed into a feeling of being excluded. Hearing aids were not known at that time, at most a tube, similar to a funnel, which had to be held to the ear. She became suspicious that something might have been said against her, and quickly offended. She would then leave the table, go to her room and not participate in meals for a certain time. Her food was brought upstairs, and she later carried the empty dishes down herself. In doing so, she would lean on the wall with her free hand as she descended the stairs, which of course left traces on the wallpaper, much to the chagrin of the parents. However, it must be admitted that she wasn't so wrong with her suspicion. For example, we were once talking about "nutrition" at the table, and Grandma joined in the conversation with the remark "Yes, yes, Nero was a cruel emperor". Did we laugh then? I don't want to rule it out.

This all sounds quite disparaging, but it's not meant that way at all. However, it may give a picture of how difficult it was to live with a person who must always have felt only tolerated. Remember that the widowed Mrs. Maurer was first taken in by her eldest son Eugen and his wife Anna in Strasbourg, lost everything after World War I, then came to her second son Kurt and his wife Fränzel in Berlin, often lived in Frankfurt with Opa and Öms - or should I say "found refuge"? - and finally moved to us in Freiburg. Grandma probably never felt "at home" anywhere, never really settled in, never been able to build up her own environment. Apart from everything else, she was always penniless and thus unable to initiate anything herself. - These are my thoughts from today's perspective. But back then? The parents may have had such things in mind. But me? None of it!

Sofie and Maria lived in the two small rooms on the top floor, so to speak opposite me. Sofie had already accompanied the family in Berlin. She belonged to it and was naturally with us in Freiburg. She probably didn't find it bad to come to Baden and thus be close to her hometown of Schwarzach. We had Maria as a "maid", as it was called then and was by no means meant to be derogatory. The two understood and complemented each other well. There was enough to do in the house, so that no one perceived this double household help as inappropriate. From today's perspective, this may seem strange, but that's how it was then. One must also consider that many electrical or mechanical aids were not yet available at that time. Everything worked out splendidly with Sofie and Maria. There must have been disagreements too, but they can hardly have been serious, otherwise I would remember at least one. This fact is not changed by the fact that Sofie occasionally groaned "Bad work!", which was usually the case when the big laundry took place. I have already described the laundry room, and it was really a labor-intensive undertaking to heat the boiler and treat the laundry accordingly. For this, a washerwoman also came, usually a sister of the neighbor Zipfel. But Sofie now had seven people to cook for. Therefore, there was almost always only lentil soup. Apart from washing day, the autumnal preserving was also quite laborious. The jars were stacked in the storage cellar. For Sofie, however, this also had advantages, because applesauce was served quite continuously throughout the year as dessert. This was accompanied by "Spitzkuchen" or "Pflastersteine", which Kromse brought from the city when he was at the university.

"From the city"... Yes, we lived more on the periphery. One went "to the city". The parents were there more often, not least because of the university, but also for normal shopping. Only groceries were available in our district of Herdern. If one was already in the city, one often went "to the pastry shop", i.e. to the cafés "Steinmetz" and "Schmidt". To get to the city, one used the tram. The nearest stop - Herdern terminus - was about 10 minutes away from us. It was only downhill. The way back took correspondingly longer, because the ascent was steep. Line 5 took about 10 minutes to the Victory Monument. From there, everything else was easily accessible on foot. From today's Hamburg perspective, these are all no distances, but for Freiburg standards at that time, it was a bit more. I myself had little to do in the city. I gladly joined the "pastry shop" visits when it fit timewise. Now and then I was in a bookstore with Kromse, where I liked to browse around, and there was also a way to the hairdresser. However, I want to mention here that with my growing enthusiasm for football, every 14 days the way to the city hairdresser was predetermined, where the magazine "Der Kicker" was on display, which I pounced on and hoped beforehand that I would have to wait a bit.

What else could one mention about the first time in Freiburg? It occurs to me that Kromse always had to be in treatment due to his sciatica. Quite close to us was the Kneipp sanatorium of the monastic order "Merciful Brothers". There were extensive possibilities for Kneipp applications and professional masseurs. One of them was a Swiss, Brother Ildefons, another Brother Basilides. A genuine friendship quickly developed with both of them, which deepened when the Nazi era became oppressive and one felt politically at home with these two.

I almost forgot to include our faithful dog Tell. There have always been dogs in the family, first Schnauzers, then the Airedale Tell. And later this chain continued. The Irish Terrier Strick came. His original name, given by the dog breeding, was "Giggler". But we thought it sounded too much like "Hitler" when you called him that. So we renamed him.


19. The New Germany Casts Its First Shadows

January 30, 1933, stylized by propaganda as the "Day of National Uprising" and March 21 of the same year, the "Day of Potsdam", were events that didn't need to cause alarm in a nationally oriented family. We were such a family, not nationalistic or even National Socialist, but national, that is, positively attuned to the fatherland and its history. This feeling was most pronounced in Kromse. The fact that he had not been able to start a military career due to his injury probably still gnawed at him secretly at that time. Mux followed his attitude without particularly emphasizing it. And I had been raised in this environment, reading books about the heroism of German soldiers in the World War, which was not yet called "the first" at that time, because Hitler had not yet unleashed the second one. I loved military marches, and President Hindenburg, the great victor of the Battle of Tannenberg, was a soldier and statesman to be admired. And Hitler? Well, at first he seemed worthy of admiration too.

What could be more natural than hanging pictures of these two heroes on the wall in my room, which I then did. However, only for a short time. The parents probably had nothing against Hindenburg. But Hitler; no, please not him. Despite endless naivety, doubts probably arose. I was told to take down the picture; I don't remember on what grounds this happened. But it may well be that then for the first time a hint was given that Opa was Jewish and Öms was a baptized Jew. The first attacks by National Socialist organizations against Jews had already taken place in those days.

The parents' reaction was understandable, because the elation that the "Day of Potsdam" had last brought quickly dissipated. Just three days after March 21, the Reichstag had passed the "Enabling Act", which gave the government largely free rein for four years, even against the constitution. All parties in the Reichstag, with the exception of the SPD, had agreed to this law, after the deputies of the KPD had already been excluded from the Reichstag before. Promptly, a week later, on April 1, came the SA-organized boycott of Jewish businesses, and that was just the beginning. (The SA - abbreviation for "Storm Division" - was the largest and strongest organization in the NSDAP, paramilitarily trained and already the main bearer of the struggle for power in the years before 1933. In addition, there was the SS - the "Protection Squad" - which later would become the representative of the atrocities.)

I don't want to recapitulate the individual legal steps that led to the totalitarian rule of the NSDAP. But for general understanding, it must be mentioned that in June/July all parties except the NSDAP were dissolved and that on July 14 a law was passed prohibiting the formation of new parties. So there was only the NSDAP left. That was the end of a democratic state order. Reichstag elections became a farce, and in the Reichstag sat only a cheering and, of course, agreeing to everything herd of functionaries.

Yes, now the German National People's Party was also dissolved, the party to which the parents had always given their vote. The signs of the times were thus unmistakable, and the parents' reaction to everything that had happened had to come. The national component was still preserved; why not, because it referred to the history of the country in which one lived and to which one felt belonging. Feeling national, that was legitimate, that existed worldwide in the respective countries. Just think of the French national anthem "Allons enfants de la patrie" or the English "right or wrong, my country".

After all, changes began to appear with Opa and Öms. Opa had turned 70. I don't know if, had there not been the "seizure of power", he could have stayed in the apartment for years as a member of the bank's supervisory board. Maybe, maybe not. But now a new era was gradually beginning for Jews. So to speak, the cut-off date for this was the so-called Nuremberg Laws, enacted on September 15, 1935. "Nuremberg" because they were passed during the Nuremberg Party Rally of the NSDAP. The main part was the "Reich Citizenship Law", which stated among other things: "Reich citizens are only nationals of German or related blood. The Reich citizen is the sole bearer of full political rights". According to this, Jews could not be Reich citizens, have no political voting rights and hold no public office. - From the same day was the "Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honor". It prohibited "marriages between Jews and nationals of German or related blood" as well as "extramarital intercourse between Jews and nationals of German or related blood".

There it was, the new definition from which henceforth the term "Jew" was derived, the "Jewish blood". The "Jewish race", that had existed before. Both terms had been developed by ethnologists, scientific "experts" whose teachings were now all too gladly adopted by National Socialism. From today's perspective, at least the younger generation may hardly believe that such "scientific" inconsistencies and fantasies could take hold in people's minds back then. But the definitions fit perfectly into the regime's philosophy. And they took hold mightily. Even today, there are numerous adherents to this terminology, rather in the generation that still consciously lived in Hitler's Germany, but in the generation to whom this has been passed down as valid.

But back to Opa and Öms. It wasn't that the bank immediately contacted him and asked for an eviction. But under the given circumstances, one had to think about moving. So it was a matter of looking for another apartment in Frankfurt or considering Königstein as a permanent residence.

However, such a plan involved considerable changes. The house had been conceived as a pure summer residence and had been built as early as 1912. So there were only stoves in some rooms to bridge cold summer days. To make the house winter-proof, a lot had to happen. The project was then tackled, but when what happened there, I don't know or don't remember anymore. I also don't know if and, if so, to what extent the parents were involved. Today I would ask myself whether these details were not so important for me at that time according to age and interests, or whether the parents did not involve me here, as in other things, in order to spare me, i.e. to let me act undisturbed in my familiar and beloved Freiburg environment. The exact date of the move from Frankfurt to Königstein can no longer be determined precisely today. Cousin Dieter in Frankfurt can't help either. The assumptions are that it was in 1936.

It is certain that we initially still went to Königstein for the summer vacations from Freiburg, where the extended family continued to gather. The togetherness there, according to my memory, was by no means marked by resignation or even doomsday mood. None of the family or the many friends had done anything wrong for which they would have had to fear harassment or even punishment. Everyone felt like good Germans, some had risked their lives fighting for Germany in World War I. So what was there to fear? Surely nothing! No one had read Hitler's "Mein Kampf", and if they had read it, the brutal, inhuman plans described in it would hardly have been taken at face value. This carelessness may have been contributed to by the fact that on June 30, 1934, as a result of an internal power struggle between the SA and the SS, the most important organizations of the Nazi state, the SS had killed the entire SA leadership. If such a thing was possible, how was it conceivable that this regime could hold on for a longer time.

I did not perceive the grandparents' move to Königstein as a break in the usual course of life. What was different from before? One was, as before, together with the others who were familiar to one and enjoyed the summer holidays. One was cheerful and laughed a lot. However, I never experienced the winter life there.


20. Adolf and Elisabeth, the Wedding

An important event that began for me in Königstein was an expansion of the family. One day, Uncle Adolf arrived accompanied by a young woman, Elisabeth Holzheu, a pianist and piano teacher from Zurich. We were told that Uncle Adolf would marry her. Cousin Dieter and I found this extremely interesting. Elisabeth was quickly integrated into the family. Later, when the grandparents had moved completely to Königstein and there was now a piano there, Elisabeth gave small concerts.

They married in 1935, and we all traveled to Zurich. A great thing, because I had never experienced a wedding before. For me, however, a shadow fell on the upcoming event from the outset, because, as usual at such celebrations, a performance by the two cousins was firmly planned. I hated learning verses, dressing up and finally presenting myself as I had last done at Opa's seventieth as Ajax and before that at a round Öms birthday as a ball of wool (!). At least I was promised as consolation that it would really be the last time now, and I would have to overcome myself once more. Of course, I then let myself be persuaded.

Dieter and I were Virtue and Vice, because Uncle Adolf had written his art history dissertation on these two figures at the cathedral in Chartres. During the performance, Dieter and I had to fight each other with verses and cardboard swords. Whether Virtue or Vice achieved a victory, I don't know, hopefully it was Virtue. But what I do know is that after the - probably successful - performance, I threw the costume props into a corner and vowed: "Never again!". Despite this aversion, I have at least retained some verses of what I learned then. They referred to Adolf's childhood and went: "... Terrible anger seized him, / angrily he snapped together / blue and without air. / Frightfully one calls: / Run, fetch for water, / bring filled barrels ...". Unfortunately, I don't remember how it continued. But apparently, Adolf as a child had been called back to reality when necessary with a surge of water when his temper had overwhelmed him.

I can still remember the days in Zurich well. First, there was staying in a hotel, totally unusual for us children and therefore exciting. We especially did a lot of mischief with the telephone - that such a thing existed in a hotel room! - and especially annoyed Aunt Annchen. Uncle Alfred had already died in 1934.

Then the festive meal - with our performance - in the guild house "Zum Saffran", located on the Limmat. It was a very stylish setting, and many times later, when I had business in Zurich, I passed by this building and remembered.

Also, getting to know new people who suddenly became something like relatives. Above all, their cars were very impressive. Elisabeth's brother was not only very nice but also exciting because he drove his Fiat like a madman. I can still see him later during a visit to Freiburg racing backwards along our long straight garage driveway to the garden gate, which impressed me enormously. Then there was Elisabeth's brother-in-law Maraini, who drove a smart Alfa Romeo. Today, it's almost embarrassing for me that I don't remember whether there was a church wedding, but I still have good memories of the automotive side of the wedding. And finally, another memory. The German part of the wedding guests had difficulties understanding Swiss German. As a new Freiburger - after all, already more than two years there and with first contacts to Alemannic poems - I was able to act a little as an interpreter.

Uncle Adolf was a fully qualified lawyer with both state exams and a doctorate, an unloved part of his education. And he was a fully qualified art historian, also with a doctorate, a very beloved part of his education. But how was he to find employment as a Jew? It seems typical to me of the attitude of the grandparents and also of the young couple that they first wanted to gain time. The Nazi era simply couldn't last much longer. And if it should continue, then a further deterioration of conditions was not to be expected. So it was a matter of gaining time first and then seeing further.

Gaining time, in this case, meant the following. There was money, after all, and so a house was built for the two of them, and Constance on Lake Constance was chosen as the location. Uncle Adolf wanted to work there initially as a private art historian scholar, while Elisabeth had the opportunity to work at the conservatory in nearby Swiss Winterthur as a piano teacher. In Winterthur, there was also the industrialist and art patron Reinhardt. I could imagine that Adolf had employment opportunities there. In normal times, this would certainly have been a well-thought-out plan, but in National Socialist Germany, it was anything but far-sighted. But it was, and I can't repeat it often enough, typical of the cluelessness towards what was actually ahead.

It can be assumed with certainty that the plan to build a house was made before the enactment of the Nuremberg Laws, still during the engagement period, so that after the wedding, the home was already prepared. The wedding itself probably took place before the Nuremberg Laws, but even if after, Elisabeth was Swiss, and they married in Switzerland anyway.

The house in Constance was finished and occupied. We often visited the family from Freiburg. I say "family" because in April 1937, their daughter Ruth was born, later called "Ruthli", as befits the daughter of a Swiss woman.


21. Zipfel & Co. - A Chapter of Its Own

I have already mentioned that the neighborhood with the shoemaker Wilhelm Zipfel and his surroundings was an important and extremely enjoyable part of my youth years in Freiburg, especially my early youth years.

It began with the oldest Zipfel son Karl painting the pillars of our garden fence when we moved in. He was unemployed, had offered to paint to the construction manager and was taken on. We got into conversation with him and thus with the neighborhood. It was only a very short step from there to Karl, his younger brother Willi and the two Zipfel nephews Ernst and Walter inviting me to join in the merry kicking on the neighboring meadow, something totally unfamiliar to me as a city kid. But not only did I quickly take a liking to this kind of sporting activity, I was immediately accepted by my new friends and even praised for my aptitude.

But I wasn't just with the neighbors for kicking. A togetherness developed that included house and yard and their inhabitants. It was a small house with a lot of garden around it, a chicken coop and a shed (called the "Schopf") with rabbits. The little house had 5 rooms, which were inhabited by the couple, the two sons and grandmother Strobel. The only living room was the kitchen, heated by the stove. It also contained the house's only - of course only cold - water source, because the toilet was outside next to the shed as a "plumping toilet", equipped with newspaper and set up over a pit that had to be emptied from time to time.

We gathered in the kitchen when it rained to play games. For a while, Tip-Kick was the big hit with tournaments and our own figures, which we bought to make the shooting leg more effective for goal shooting by bending and filing. Everyone also had their own special shooting technique, depending on whether it was for short or long-range shots. Or we played car racing on self-made game boards with self-crafted small racing cars, which were mostly carved from clothespins and wheeled with drawing pins. Depending on color and appearance, they were Mercedes, Auto-Union, Alfa, Maserati or Bugatti.

Next to the kitchen, without a door, was the workshop, probably the largest room in the little house. Father Zipfel was a master shoemaker, and he placed great importance on not being called a "cobbler". Countless times I sat next to him and watched for hours as he soled shoes or made new ones. New soles were fastened with wooden nails, special knives were sharpened, lasts were made and much more.

Father Zipfel was a small, quiet man who smoked the stumps popular in this area and often held a cold stump between his teeth. He had lost a leg in the war and wore a prosthesis reaching far up. He often suffered from severe pain in the stump and then had to lie in bed. But this didn't stop him or us from crowding around the radio set up on the bedside table for broadcasts important to us. On Sundays, these were either football games or car races, whose reporters Dr. Paul Laven and Rolf Wernicke were familiar to us. We were thrilled when broadcasts came from the Nürburgring and the stations Döttinger Höhe, Schwalbenschwanz and Karussell reported. On Saturdays, we were captivated by the "Cheerful Saturday Afternoon" from the Köln-Langenberg station with its speaker Rudi Rauher.

Sometimes it was difficult for the parents to get me out of this group for meals. This was especially true for kicking on long summer evenings, when brother-in-law Albert, who played in the 2nd team of Freiburger F.C., also joined in, put on his - real! - football boots and enlivened our game. Karl would stand in goal and call out: "Here stands the man who holds everything!" My preference for football has its roots here, and I often went with my friends to the games of Freiburg teams and later also participated accordingly in school sports.

On rainy days, the youth sometimes met at our place. In my quite large room, we held "tank battles", i.e. two to three tables were turned upside down, equipped with the unhinged doors of the dresser, the shutters closed, and then we went at each other in the dark, pushing the tables back and forth on the floor until we hit an opponent. Sometimes it crashed quite considerably.

Or we shot at a target with the air rifle, which was attached to an overturned bed table that was actually intended to make meals easier for a bedridden patient. Later I cursed the air rifle. Instead of shooting at the target, I once shot at a sparrow that was peacefully picking up its crumbs in front of me. It fell over and was dead. I have never forgotten this moment. Killing, unthinkable! Fortunately, I never came into a situation during the war that would have demanded such a thing from me.

But now to continue with the Zipfel chapter. The extended Zipfel family included Mrs. Zipfel's three sisters with their husbands. Two men are worth mentioning. First, Mr. Wilhelm, Albert's father-in-law, whom we called "Old Schwäbberle". He had an incredible body volume and worked in the slaughterhouse. His skills were in demand when a chicken or a rabbit was to take the way into the cooking pot. Old Schwäbberle threw his whole weight into the balance when a group of boys hostile to us from the village-like suburb of Herden wanted to destroy our "hut" that we had built in a nearby grove. Mr. Wilhelm drove away the enemies by threatening them with an axe! With Albert and Father Zipfel, he sat - I believe on 2 chairs - at the card table on weekends, of course outdoors, and played cards. The game was called Zego. We kibitzed but didn't understand anything. For me, it was simply atmospherically worth watching.

Mr. Keisinger, Ernst's father, made a great impression on me. The Keisingers lived very close but hardly interacted with the Zipfels except for Ernst. Mr. Keisinger, a precision mechanic by profession, was called Modest and was just as his name suggested: reserved and modest, an upright Social Democrat. He died very early. Mrs. Keisinger worked at the dairy and enabled her son to attend a gymnasium until he graduated, which still cost something back then to be at a "higher school". Ernst later made a very good Abitur and studied successfully.

In my free time, i.e. when there was no school and after finishing homework, I was mostly with Zipfel and Co. We got along splendidly, and I don't remember any notable arguments. There were the elementary school students Willi and Walter, Karl who was first unemployed and then an apprentice precision mechanic, the bookkeeper Albert, the high school student Ernst - to name only the young and the somewhat older friend - and I, who came from a rather capitalist house. My parents found all this wonderful, because I was moving in an environment where I could really live. Grandma found it a bit below our "dignity", but her vote had no weight. Of course, I also spent time with classmates, but they initially played a rather subordinate role.

When we got a ping-pong table, it didn't take long for the enthusiasm for kicking to spill over to the new sport. Shortly after, there was also a ping-pong table at the Zipfels, and from then on, if the weather allowed, there was hardly anything else but table tennis. The ping-pong tables were always set up outdoors. In our house, there was no room large enough for it, and at the Zipfels even less so. Each of us had our own playing style, and even Father Zipfel played enthusiastically despite his prosthesis. We organized tournaments with prizes and even temporarily joined a table tennis club that trained once a week in a hall of the Feierling brewery under the leadership of the Ketterer brothers.

There would be so much more to tell about our time together, but the essentials have probably been captured. Perhaps it's worth adding that on rainy weekends we developed into passionate moviegoers. I was able to measure this later by the fact that I found many "Film Couriers" in a file folder, carefully filed by date. After all, I had bought such a program - richly illustrated - with every cinema visit, such as "The Czar's Courier" with Adolf Wohlbrück, "Cherries in the Neighbor's Garden" or - a few years later - "Truxa" with La Jana and Hannes Stelzer. La Jana was a scantily clad dancer, very exciting for us. I think we initially only bought the "Film Courier" because it was dangerous to go to films not suitable for young people. However, when it was somewhat possible from the appearance, we also managed. The technique was to send the older Karl or Albert ahead to buy the tickets and then sneak in, perhaps even through the back entrance when the first showing was over and the audience was streaming out. The respective "technique" depended on the buildings of the cinema. The "Harmonie" was quite different from the "Friedrichsbau" and the "Zentral" quite different from the "Union" or the "Casino".

Being together in this environment was unproblematic from the start. Father Zipfel was a Social Democrat, just like his brother-in-law Keisinger. He never became a real Nazi, nor did the others. It was a thoroughly good neighborhood, also with the parents. I still consider these years as a particularly joyful part of my youth with many advantages for me.

Of course, it's also correct that from the Zipfel perspective, there were also advantages, at least many stimuli such as table tennis. But not only that, the most important advantage was that the parents had a great interest in not being built up from the Zipfel side. The little house with all the greenery around it had to be preserved. The property belonged to a former brickyard, because the clayey soil had formerly served as raw material for burning bricks. Mrs. Zipfel's father, long since deceased, had been the manager there. The Zipfels lived there as tenants. When the sale of the property and development threatened, the parents lent the Zipfels enough money to buy the property and entered the mortgage. Thus, the green surroundings were saved. Why the parents didn't buy the property themselves at that time is hardly understandable to me today. But perhaps they simply wanted to hold back in a time that anyway involved being watched suspiciously for them.

This mortgage granting had an aftermath after the war that turned out extremely unfavorable for our family. The Zipfels repaid the mortgage shortly before the currency reform in bad Reichsmarks, and we were thus deprived of a repayment in D-Marks. This was annoying from our point of view and was seen by Kromse as an extremely unfriendly action towards us. However, I must say that I consider this behavior understandable from the Zipfel perspective. Wouldn't we have acted the same way in the reverse case? For the Zipfels, it turned out to be an absolute stroke of luck, because son Willi later sold the property at a high price, made a lot of money with it and significantly boosted his family's standard of living. Anyone who goes to Wintererstrasse 69 today can see that not much of the green surroundings has remained. House after house.


22. A Life Between Normalcy and Growing Unease

It will be difficult to put the experiences and events of this chapter in the correct chronological order. Some things mentioned later may have occurred earlier, and vice versa. Nobody kept a diary back then, and I can only write down what comes to mind and what seems worth mentioning from memory. The period of this chapter roughly corresponds to the years 1935 to 1936 or 1937.

Anyone who thinks that the Nuremberg Laws hit the family like a bolt of lightning is mistaken. Daily life in Freiburg, as I remember it, went on quite normally. Did we feel disturbed by the political developments? I don't think so, not very much, though surely my parents did more than I did. I'll address that in the next chapter. Of course, the Nuremberg Laws marked a turning point. Mux was initially affected and, naturally, the grandparents to a greater extent. This must have been a burden. How heavy a burden, I don't know. Discrimination was now anchored in law, but at first it existed more on paper and hardly affected everyday life. One must also not overlook that there was still hope that Nazi rule would be of limited duration. Hadn't a feud between the SA and SS come to a bloody end on July 30, 1934, indicating explosive internal rivalries? People clung to such assumptions. Sure, the Jews were being ostracized, but this had happened before in the history of many countries, and not infrequently. No one believed at the time that this was the beginning of a development that would escalate and eventually lead to a hunt for the life and limb of Jews. So people adapted to the circumstances and still lived a fairly pleasant everyday life. Kromse continued to attend his history lectures, and Mux still went to "her" philosopher Heidegger for some time. This stopped for her, however, when theater, concerts, and even the university were forbidden to her. The sign "Jews Unwanted" appeared increasingly on the doors of hotels and restaurants as well.

In the private sphere, focal points formed. The orientation was towards where like-minded political views could be found. Thus, the connection to the Thünas grew ever closer and quite soon into a friendship that would last until death. Tim was straightforward and uncomplicated. I admired him very much, and not just because I enjoyed how he awakened in me the enthusiasm for everything driven by an engine. He even took me to the Mercedes paddock at the Schauinsland races, where I got to experience race car drivers up close. He lent me crime novels, Western books, and science fiction that left a lasting impression on me. In the evenings, I devoured entire series by Edgar Wallace, Zane Grey, and Hans Dominick. While this may not have been of the highest level, it gave me much joy and - how good! - put an end to reading war books.

Tim, as the head of the Mercedes branch in Freiburg, naturally always had company cars and could occasionally drive "hot rods" for a day or two. With these, he would drive up the road to Feldberg with Kromse and Professor Brühler to visit August Euler. Euler was the first German aviator and friends with Tim, the first German war pilot. When Brühler said, "Thüna, let Caruso sing!", Tim would engage the supercharger, and the gentlemen would delight like little children at the howling engine. Kromse enthusiastically recounted these trips and the gentlemen's gathering at the "Old Man of the Mountain," where Euler, when things got heated, would smooth the waves with the words: "Gentlemen, no cramps!" This remark became a catchphrase in our family.

Tim died early. He had cancer. Mux was very close to him, especially during his long and terribly painful period of suffering, and accompanied him until death.

Pu, his wife, was what you would call a "laid-back type" today. She became Mux's closest friend, and you can hardly imagine two more different people. After Tim's death, Pu managed the upbringing of their two sons well. It was certainly not an easy time for her, but she was full of humor. Once she sent her two sons to the dentist Dr. Hauser. He lived in the same house as the general practitioner Dr. Fickler. Obediently, the two went there but mistook the door and ended up at Dr. Fickler's. He said, "Take off your clothes," examined them, then said, "You can get dressed again, there's nothing wrong with you." At home, they told about the examination, and Pu couldn't calm down that her sons hadn't realized they hadn't been to the dentist!

I got along well with Uz and Spatz, without being close friends. The age difference was too great for that, 7 and 3 years respectively. However, I did later go to Eugen Kirchenbauer's boxing school with Spatz. Kromse thought we should acquire knowledge in this sport, which he called the "noble art of self-defense," and Pu agreed. We were well instructed, but later I never managed to punch someone in the nose or stomach. At least we were well versed in footwork, and I made a certain impression in school sports when I danced around an "opponent" better than the others and feinted boxing attacks.

Opa, though discriminated against by the Nuremberg Laws, could still travel unmolested. So he visited us now and then. His accommodation in Freiburg could have caused problems, as our tiny guest room without washing facilities was out of the question, and in a hotel, the name Katzenellenbogen would have either immediately met with rejection or at least aroused "suspicion." But Mr. Haas, the owner of the best house in town, the "Zähringer Hof," was an opponent of the Nazis. Opa could still stay there without problems for some time and enjoyed it. This eventually became impossible too, when in August 1938 it was decreed that all male Jews had to add the name "Israel" to their existing first names and have it officially recorded in passports and identity cards. For women, it was the name "Sarah." Shortly after, all passports and identity cards of Jews were additionally stamped with a thick "J." This publicly established discrimination. We, and other families, thanked Haas for his political stance by dining at the "Zähringer Hof" once a week.

Whenever Opa was in Freiburg, he would go to Holzhauer's delicatessen and buy us a goose. Sofie looked forward to preparing it. That was something special. Otherwise, as far as food was concerned, we lived without particular highlights. We didn't exactly save, but we were a bit economical. Sofie was now Mux's only help. Emma had to leave us because Jewish women were no longer allowed to employ younger domestic staff.

I said Opa visited us. Because I can't remember a visit from Öms. She was certainly fully occupied with the relocation of the entire huge household from Frankfurt to Königstein. But additionally, the stroke that left her almost completely unable to walk and speak should be mentioned here. I don't know exactly when that was. More will be reported on this later.

In the time span covered by this chapter, the Olympic Games took place, which had been awarded to Germany before 1933 and were held in Berlin in 1936. The German government, led by its inventive propaganda minister, didn't miss the chance to prove the leading position of Nazi-ruled Germany worldwide. Everything was exemplarily prepared and organized, and indeed, the world stood in awe of what was put together in Berlin. Germany's internal politics rested during this time, so that the regime's grimace remained hidden. And the German population looked proudly at what was duly appreciated in the German press and radio. The already strongly developed national feeling was, so to speak, further increased.

Speaking of Olympics. Something quite different needs to be said about this keyword. In 1936, we bought a car that the Opel works had aptly named "Olympia." It was a convertible sedan, meaning you could roll back the top, and the side parts remained unchanged. Not a "hot rod," but a family car with 4 seats. The car had, as the latest achievement, a synchronized suspension, which caused a terrible rocking. One simply had to feel sick!

Kromse had gotten his driver's license at the ripe age of 55, and now we were ready to go. Whether it was due to his age or the quirks of the car, one way or another, Kromse often found himself in situations he was helpless to deal with in the early days. This included, above all, "stalling" the engine, preferably in the middle of intersections. There he stood, and the engine was distinguished by its stillness. If I sat next to him and such a thing happened, I looked shyly around. It could have been that schoolmates had witnessed this scene, and that would have been very embarrassing for me. Or Kromse had forgotten to remove the cover attached to the radiator in cold temperatures, resulting in the radiator starting to boil after a few kilometers in now warmer weather. Or the engine wouldn't start when we were all already sitting expectantly in the car with white dust caps on our heads, its roof open, ready to start a trip into the Kaiserstuhl spring in glorious weather. I saw Kromse's futile efforts, recognized that the mixture had become too rich due to the choke being pulled for too long, causing the engine to flood, and now gave "wise" advice. It led to an exchange of words, Mux mediated, and the result was tears from Mux and me. But we did eventually start.

After such initial difficulties, Kromse developed into a routine driver who could be relied upon. When we drove to Frankfurt or Königstein, we went on roads that today would be considered second-class at best, through villages where all sorts of poultry and cattle moved about, through which a car had to make its way. There were no highways yet.

Most of the time, however, the car was used for trips to golf in Gutach or just into town. Household shopping had to be done, and - very importantly - the purchase of a foreign newspaper was also on the agenda. Every German newspaper was now forced to write in line with the party. But Kromse wanted to stay properly informed and therefore read the "Times." He also had a like-minded person in the newspaper seller Baier, with whom he could talk without risk. When the "Times" was banned, he bought Dutch newspapers and studied them with the help of a dictionary. It's to be criticized that he always put our dogs, first the Airedale Tell and later the Irish Terrier Strick, next to him on the passenger seat, for which Oma had crocheted a cover. The dogs were usually only along for short trips, but still, we humans had to take the back seat.

My enthusiasm for football was running high at that time. I attended almost every home game of the FFC, cut out the match reports from the Monday edition of the Freiburg newspaper and collected them. Of course, I could recite not only the FFC lineup but also that of the German national team by heart (and still can today). Once, when I was sick for a longer time and had moved to Kromse's bed with Mux, I insisted that Mux learn these names by heart, and I even quizzed her on them later. Once I took her to an FFC game and sat - in this company, of course - in the front row of the grandstand. It was the most terrible game I've ever experienced, horribly brutal and with a helpless referee. An FFC defender was so badly injured that he had to leave the game. He sat down next to us in the grandstand and put on an almost incessant whistling concert on two fingers. That alone was terrible for Mux. Finally, everything escalated, and the referee abandoned the game. Mux looked at me quite helplessly and asked if it was always like this. She never went to a football game again.

I mentioned the political risk. It played an important role. One had to be very careful, especially we in our exposed position. An ill-considered word, and difficulties were pre-programmed. The party man responsible for us was Block Warden Stark. He lived on Sebastian-Kneipp-Strasse, quite close. He seemed rather harmless, but you could never know. He surely watched us. There were whispers of "Dachau" and "concentration camps," nobody could imagine what these meant, but people were simply afraid.

So it was also unavoidable that we had to buy a swastika flag. At that time, it was customary to flag houses on "national" days, and there were plenty of such days. A swastika flag hung from every house. We couldn't be an exception. Block Warden Stark certainly checked.

So we lived in a mixture of normality and unease, sometimes even fear. All of this is still very present to me, and I have described it in such detail so that even a reader born much later can get a vivid idea. I hope I have succeeded in conveying this.


23. Everything's Fine, but Storm Clouds Gathering

I have described what was happening within the family circle. And how did things look in my immediate surroundings? School, free time, sports. Here too, there were pros and cons. But certainly more pros.

How should I begin? Perhaps with the fact that I had by now received a bicycle, which made me more flexible and mobile. Above all, it considerably shortened the way to school. We lived uphill from Herdern, where the school was also located. Shortly after our house, Sebastian-Kneipp-Straße went steeply downhill into the "village," and coming back one had to climb steeply. It was somewhat more moderate via Waltersbergweg, but also longer. The shorter but steeper route was closed for downhill traffic, which usually didn't bother me. There was never a policeman there anyway. I felt very comfortable on the bicycle, which resulted in me going quite fast downhill, often leading to skidding, be it on sand, gravel, wet pavement, or simply because I was going too fast. As a result, at least one knee was often plastered or bandaged. But my nose bridge and upper lip were also affected when I ran into or perhaps even knocked over a pedestrian in the dark on Waltersbergweg. This was, by the way, a clear signal to put on my glasses when cycling in the dark.

The short-sightedness had, however, already made itself noticeable on other occasions. I had increasing difficulties copying from my neighbor or the person in front of me during written work at school. And if I put on my glasses for that, the teacher of course knew that I was up to such things. Copying had already been made more difficult - also due to short-sightedness - as some teachers had placed me in one of the front benches so that I could read what was written on the blackboard. Because the glasses were often not available. For whatever reasons, they were broken in this or that place and had to be patched up by Mux with Leukoplast, which didn't always hold but could be repeated as often as necessary without incurring costs.

The chapter on "Zipfel & Co." has shown that I spent the main part of my free time there for several years, as far as the time required for school allowed. With increasing demands for classes, however, the time I needed for school became longer. French and Greek were added to the foreign language Latin, and - quite bitter - mathematics became increasingly difficult. Biology, physics, and especially chemistry led a marginal existence, but one still had to reckon with tests now and then. So it was advisable to stay up to date, because otherwise there was the threat of tutoring, which from my point of view was simply an unacceptable restriction of free time. German, history, and geography caused no difficulties, and sports was at the top of my preferences anyway. In the gym with limited enthusiasm. But as soon as a ball came into play, the damper was gone, whether it was fistball in the schoolyard or football or handball on the sports field.

For the more problematic subjects, I began to appreciate collaboration for homework. Because of mathematics, I preferably went to experts in this discipline to have patient classmates explain to me what I hadn't understood in class. I usually managed translations alone at home, but for tricky passages, I sat down with classmates of the same level of knowledge. We then cross-pollinated each other. German essays were always successful own productions. One, however, went completely wrong. It was about the Nibelungs. I don't remember if I was sick or simply couldn't find access to the topic. In any case, Opa took care of the essay during a visit. It became "my" worst essay!

Apparently a normal, peaceful life. And no impairment from outside? It's difficult to give an answer to that. Perhaps one can formulate it like this: noticeable yes, impairment no. I want to try to explain that, because I think the explanation is quite plausible. It results from the environment.

Let's start like this: One day, Professor Litzelmann, our biology teacher, called me to him to tell me that he would soon be covering Mendel's law and would be addressing the Nazi racial theory in the process. This was not directed against me. He was obliged to teach this material, but wanted to tell me beforehand.

Litzelmann, a little man of about 1.55m, had been a war participant and told a lot about it. So he was certainly nationally minded. He was not an opponent of the Nazis, perhaps even in favor. But somewhere he had decency. Even if he had liked me, this information would by no means have been a matter of course. Something else came into play: All this happened in Freiburg and not in Frankfurt, Berlin or Dresden. And moreover, we were in the FG. What that meant will soon become clear. From Litzelmann's behavior, I could deduce that my "racial" situation was known in the school. And also in the class, which I confirmed decades later by survey at a class reunion.

Yes, the class. I have already hinted at its composition. Here's more on that. By now, all youth organizations had been incorporated into the Hitler Youth, the Protestant ones, the Catholic ones, the Boy Scouts, and whatever else there was. However, this did not automatically mean the transfer of membership. As a result, by no means was all of the youth now organized in the Hitler Youth. This was especially true for our class, especially for those who had a very Catholic parental home and for those who lived in the Catholic boarding school. In fact, none of them had been in the Hitler Youth until graduation, a fact that was hardly matched anywhere else in Germany at that time. And of course, I wasn't in the Hitler Youth either.

All of this was important for me, very important, when the State Youth Day was introduced. It meant that members of the HJ had no school lessons on Saturdays, but "service" in their respective organizations. The non-HJ members had to appear at school for state political instruction. Under "normal" circumstances, I would have then been alone in the class or would have been assigned to another class to be indoctrinated politically, a devastatingly discriminatory situation. I was spared this in my class with its very special composition. We were indeed a minority, but I knew I was not only not alone, but even among like-minded people. What luck! I still stand in amazement before this twist of fate. Knowing such connections is immensely important to be able to understand how my life unfolded back then. Certainly much more normal, pleasant, than a youth of the same age and same situation had to experience elsewhere in Germany at that time.

I mentioned Litzelmann. He addressed me personally, for whatever reason. With the exception of Professor Brühler, the friend of Kromse and director of the FG, with whom we had history and who called me by my first name, totally unusual and reluctantly tolerated by me, I was a student like any other for the other teachers, whether Nazi or not; good in some subjects, less good in others, and in still others barely maintaining the required level of knowledge. I moved in the knowledge hierarchy of the class somewhat above the middle.

Even our gym and sports teacher, who was said to be considerably infected by the Nazi virus, treated me as a normal student. My preference for his subject and my performance probably contributed to this; but he could have ignored me. After all, he once wrote in my assessment: "Peter Maurer is puny; engages fearlessly in combat sports." He probably did this because I played goalkeeper in soccer and threw myself at the feet of the onrushing opponents to prevent goals. Sometimes I injured noble parts like my nose, which then stood a little crooked in my face and had to be pushed straight again by constant pressure of the thumb on Dr. Fickler's instructions. I tried to protect myself from abrasions with padded pants and knee pads, because the sports field had not a single blade of grass left, especially at the goals. My goalkeeping career ended when I began to react too late without glasses. After all, I stood between the posts for several years and dreamed of once being able to punch away a high corner kick, as the goalkeeper of the FFC did back then. Unfortunately, we were all still too underdeveloped for a corner kick to be delivered high to the goal. It was all more or less just kicking around.

The general assessment, which was part of every report card, was also usually not bad. However, it often ended with the words: "... could achieve a better result with greater diligence and more strained attention..." Perhaps this was justified, but perhaps I was also overestimated.

And now briefly something about the beginning and end of a lesson in those days. It had been introduced that the teachers, after entering the classroom, had to offer the "German Greeting", that is, to shout "Heil Hitler" with their right arm stretched out. The class had to answer in the same way. And likewise at the end of the lesson. Every teacher did it differently. While some came in with a textbook under their right arm, raised their right hand a little and mumbled a "la" or "ler", others stood at attention and shouted "Heil Hitler" loudly. We students, of course, knew what to do with whom. Either we laboriously and tormentedly pushed ourselves out of the bench and also mumbled "ler", or we jumped up and screamed "Heil Hitler". From today's perspective, this almost seems like a satire, but it really was like that.

In the same context belonged the lining up of the whole school in the gym when there was a national day to commemorate - e.g. January 30 as the anniversary of the national uprising - and either the director gave a speech or we had to listen to the radio broadcast of a Hitler speech. At the end of the events, the Deutschland and Horst-Wessel songs were sung, because this combination was considered the German national anthem. We had to keep our right arm stretched out during the whole singing, which was quite a laborious exercise given the long time. We smaller ones then had the advantage of standing in the second or third row, because then we could conveniently lay our arm on the shoulder of the person in front of us. So far our school, which and whose environment became more and more important for me.

But of course, the confirmation in 1937 is also to be mentioned. As I already mentioned, going to church was something important for us. There was also a close connection with Pastor Daub. I was in confirmation class with him, which ended with an exam in the church. For confirmation, I received the saying "Don't you know that I must be about my Father's business". This answer had been given by the boy Jesus to his parents when they had looked for him, then found him in the temple and asked him what he was doing there. Somehow this saying also played a role for me later in that I always felt connected to the church. And of course I also got a black confirmation suit. As was usual at the time, this was my first suit with long trousers. Since I was growing quite quickly at that time - you can believe me - the suit was bought to grow into, i.e. it was sized so that I could still wear it even with further growth. Unfortunately, I didn't grow anymore, the trousers were always too long. I later outgrew the jacket.


24. The Pressure Increases and Escalates

The grandparents had meanwhile moved from Frankfurt to Königstein. The domestic staff had decreased, as finances would have to be tighter in the future. But the grandparents still had considerable securities, so life in Königstein seemed to be possible for the time being. And it continued, apart from some restrictions, initially still more or less as one was accustomed to from before. For Opa, the Scotch terrier Stupps, which the grandparents had received as a gift from the family, played an important role. It is difficult from today's perspective to comprehend when the final move to Königstein took place. In contrast, there is an officially recorded date for the definitive end of the Königstein period: December 16, 1938. It can be assumed that the grandparents lived there for 4 to 4 1/2 years.

It is also no longer possible to reconstruct exactly when Öms suffered a severe stroke that almost completely robbed her of speech and also paralyzed her to such an extent that she could hardly take a step without outside help. An arm was also paralyzed. It was probably a hemiplegia including the ability to speak. I estimate that the stroke occurred in 1937 or perhaps even in 1938. For we still traveled from Freiburg to Königstein for the summer holidays and met with the extended family there. Kromse always came along, because Berlin and Wannsee belonged to the past. But he always had a golf club with him to at least practice without a ball. Our dog also went to Königstein.

Hitler and his government had succeeded in stringing one success after another. This could only succeed at first by breaking treaties. First, there was the withdrawal from the League of Nations. And this was followed by the breach of the Treaty of Versailles, which had ended the state of war of the World War, had inflicted severe damage on the German people and was an important reason for the rise and seizure of power by the National Socialists. Thus, in March 1935, Germany introduced the previously forbidden general conscription, and a year later German troops occupied the demilitarized Rhineland. Also in 1936, the globally noticed Olympics took place in Berlin, where - to give just one example - the French delegation marched past Hitler with raised right arm (the Hitler salute), a typical sign that Hitler's Germany was on the way to making an impression on foreign countries. In October and November 1936, Germany concluded pacts with Italy and Japan and established the so-called Berlin-Rome-Tokyo Axis. Apart from these foreign policy successes, the German population was impressed by the decline in the high unemployment that still existed in 1933, which was achieved through a large-scale job creation program. At the forefront of this were the construction of autobahns - openly recognizable and correspondingly exploited for propaganda - and the beginning production of war material - rather kept hidden and therefore recognized much later. Thus, in the Spanish Civil War that had meanwhile broken out, dive bombers - Stukas - manufactured in Germany were used for the first time, flown by German military pilots who belonged to the "Legion Condor", a detachment of the German Luftwaffe. But all this only became apparent later.

The mood among the population was good. People were pleased about the improved foreign policy position of the German Reich and about the economic upswing. The anti-Jewish domestic policy received little attention. It didn't fit badly anyway with the undoubtedly still widespread anti-Semitism.

The most spectacular act of the Hitler government during this period was the occupation of Austria on March 11, 1938. It triggered - and this is still widely denied today - not only in Germany, but especially in Austria, an enormous jubilation. I was 16 at the time and can remember the events of those days very well. We were then - for the first time since 1932 - visiting Berlin and were sitting with Schorch Möller, a close friend of my parents, in our guesthouse when Hitler's appearance in Vienna was broadcast on the radio. The jubilation was boundless, and Hitler gave a speech with a faltering voice that ended with the words: "Hereby I announce to history the entry of my homeland into the German Reich!" We had no possibility to escape this radio broadcast. Firstly, it would have left a provocative impression that one could not afford, and secondly, it was not without interest to experience it all. Schorch Möller, a real Berliner and ardent anti-Nazi, however, posed a certain danger for us. When Hitler's voice faltered in the speech, which happened several times, Schorch Möller commented with the words: "He'll go crazy soon! Soon! Now!" We were quite afraid that someone would hear that and report it, because Schorch Möller didn't think of whispering. When the annexation of Austria was followed by a referendum on whether people in Germany agreed with it, Schorch Möller let us know: "I socked it to Adolf with that no!" And when he finally had to buy a swastika flag, he said to the saleswoman that he wanted the smallest flag there was. When there was no smaller one available, he sealed the purchase with the words: "Then I'll just wrap the flag a bit around the pole." Of course, the vote brought an approval of over 99%. Every election since 1933 had been manipulated accordingly. Austria was now called "the Ostmark".

Hitler's last action in 1938 was the occupation of the Sudetenland, a part of Czechoslovakia where many Germans lived, in September. Hitler declared that this was his last territorial demand, and in the famous Four-Power Agreement in Munich (Germany, Italy, France, England), Hitler received foreign policy approval for this. A war had been avoided once again, and Hitler had prevailed.

I describe all this in somewhat more detail because I find that for those born much later, it must be explained where the main reasons for the widespread enthusiasm for Hitler lay. One can even have a certain understanding for it from today's perspective.

Against the background of this wave of approval for everything the government did, it was understandable that the government could now proceed to further intensify its Jewish policy. On August 17, 1938, the first names Israel and Sarah are introduced. On September 27, Jewish lawyers must cease their practice. On September 30, the licenses of Jewish doctors expire. - I must add that I did not experience all this at the time, but have now looked up these dates from books as I write this. The parents, but especially the grandparents with their large circle of friends and acquaintances, which included doctors and lawyers, must have experienced all this very consciously. The noose was tightening ever further, and it could now be more foreseeable that worse things were to come. Emigration had meanwhile been made extremely difficult for Jews, because in such a case the entire fortune would have had to be surrendered. For many, especially the old, the question then naturally arose: how to live abroad without money? The only possibility was to find someone there who would guarantee to provide for the livelihood of the emigrants, to provide a so-called affidavit. But who could have such a privilege? Opa could have done it, because Wolfensberger, an old friend in Zurich, had offered to help. But the grandparents decided against it. Öms had meanwhile become a nursing case, and they probably would have been reluctant to leave everything behind, i.e. to hand it over to the Nazis.

When did one begin to suspect that one day there would be an intervention in Jewish assets? Probably when they were registered, which had taken place some time before 1938. In any case, the grandparents had started relatively early to make donations to the following generations. Diet's father Uncle Erich was a lawyer. He was probably the organizer of these actions, which stretched over the years and had to be carried out according to ever new aspects, because new laws were constantly being passed. In the final stage of the donations, the beneficiaries were no longer the children of the grandparents, i.e. Mux, Aunt Gretel and Uncle Adolf, who were themselves Jews according to Nazi criteria, but their children, i.e. Dieter, Rollo and me. (Adolf's daughter could no longer be included in this circle for reasons I will explain shortly.) In this way, at least part of the grandparents' fortune could be withdrawn from state access. If I describe this now, I am somewhat anticipating events, but this makes it easier to understand the connections.

Öms' stroke had changed a lot. She needed care, and nursing help was not always available. Aunt Gretel bore the main burden, but Mux was often involved too. Once, on the way back to Freiburg, she had a vision that boded terrible things for the future. She looked out of the window of the moving train and suddenly saw the horizon lit up by the glow of fire. But there was no fire far and wide. I don't know when this happened, probably in 1939, maybe in autumn, but certainly before November 9, when the synagogues went up in flames. This vision troubled her greatly.

With that, I am already shortly before the escalation hinted at in the title of this chapter. On November 9, 1939, the German embassy employee vom Rath, who had been shot and seriously injured by a Jew, died in Paris. This event triggered the so-called "Reichskristallnacht" (Night of Broken Glass) in Germany. In an organization orchestrated by Minister Goebbels, the SA led the burning of synagogues throughout the Reich, Jewish shops were destroyed and plundered, Jews were arrested and taken to concentration camps. German Jews were imposed a total levy of 1 billion Reichsmarks as atonement, and in addition - more cynical treatment is hardly possible - the Jews had to pay for the damage caused by the Nazi mob in the "Reichskristallnacht".

Among the Jews who were taken to a concentration camp was Uncle Adolf. He had been taken from his house in Konstanz. He was sent to Dachau. Elisabeth was Swiss. As such, she set all the levers at her disposal in motion to get her husband released. The fact that she succeeded after 3 weeks is certainly due to her nationality. The assurance of Swiss friends in Winterthur, the Reinhardt family, to take in Adolf and his family certainly helped. The fact that a serious illness led to Adolf's release may have helped under the aforementioned circumstances. On its own, however, this would certainly not have been enough, because one more dead Jew more or less - if at all - didn't matter even then.

It should be noted, however, that the mortally ill Adolf was initially cared for by Professor Bohnenkamp, the father of a classmate, after his release, although Bohnenkamp was a thoroughly believing National Socialist, an extraordinary occurrence. I don't know why Bohnenkamp was willing to do this. But it is certain that Adolf would not have survived without this care. In Winterthur, Adolf was then nursed back to health, which took months. Konstanz had to be given up.

Where could the huge sum of 1 billion Reichsmarks come from, if not from the surrender of Jewish assets? Even after the donations, the grandparents still had quite a bit. Most of it now had to be given away. The fate of Königstein was also sealed with this. I have told a lot about Königstein. Now it was finally over. No doubt this triggered sadness, but what else was there to do but face fate? The grandparents moved back to Frankfurt on December 16, 1938. The new apartment was small. It was located on Zeppelinallee. I don't know if only Jews lived in the house. One can suspect it, because Dr. Brodnitz and his wife, good friends of the grandparents, had also found refuge there.

As I write all this down today, I ask myself whether there was still a glimmer of hope for the grandparents and also for us that Hitler and his Reich would disappear again in the foreseeable future. One can't imagine such a thing. And yet life went on in more or less normal ways, although of course one can debate at length about what "normal" means. From today's perspective and with the distance of decades, one can assume that when a burden has become a permanent state, one can also live with it without thinking about it to the bitter end every day. I myself have experienced such a thing as a permanent state in the war.

What was the daily routine like in Zeppelinallee? I don't know exactly. What I remember from visits is a table in the dining and living room, at the head of which Öms sat. A lot was read aloud, for a long time from "Gone with the Wind". I wasn't often in Zeppelinallee, perhaps because if we had traveled to Frankfurt as a family, there would have been problems with accommodation. Perhaps they wanted to keep at least me as a child away from such sadness, hardly understandable from today's perspective, because don't grandparents enjoy having a grandchild? But who knows how it was back then. It may just as well be that after Königstein, Opa and Öms were now reluctant to receive visits in Zeppelinallee. Such thoughts are of course idle, but they are there and move me.


25. 1938 and 1939 in Freiburg

How did we live nearly 2 years before the outbreak of World War II and in the time until then? I will try to describe it. However, I must admit that from today's perspective, this undertaking is not entirely simple. Why? Simply because only after the end of the war were insights and understanding gradually gained about all that had really happened in Nazi Germany. Therefore, the assessment from today's perspective is quite different from what it could have been at the time. One did have some suspicions back then, but even that was, as it turned out later, only a fraction of what was really happening. Therefore, life at that time was more livable than it actually should have been from today's perspective. - Have I succeeded in outlining in a few words what lies between the actions of that time and today's thinking about those actions? It would be good if I have expressed myself clearly enough, because this discrepancy will, as evident from the next chapters, also apply to the period from the beginning of the war until the end of the war.

Yes, how did we live? When I say we continued to live, I avoid the word "normal", which basically has quite little meaning. I have already referred to this once, and there is nothing more to add.

So I went to school as before and tried to fulfill my obligations there as best I could. By Easter 1938, we had completed the first six classes of the Gymnasium. This was equivalent to the so-called Mittlere Reife, a kind of intermediate degree. What followed were the last two years until the Abitur. From now on, things got serious again, which for me meant that I was even more strongly integrated into the class community. We worked a lot together, because one could hardly afford to slack off. A special kind of "collaboration" for me in the classroom was the seat next to our primus Karlheinz Keller, with whom I also got along well otherwise. However, this seat was not only coveted by me. So it was necessary to be on the spot in time. By discussing this plan with Karlheinz beforehand, arriving very early in the classroom on the first day of the new school year to occupy the two seats and being able to defend them, I was finally successful. This togetherness then lasted until the Abitur. This was important because Karlheinz proved to be a support on many occasions. Not only did he have clear handwriting, he could also whisper very understandably.

But something else also led to the school environment becoming more important for me. A new friendship developed that was to last for years, even decades. And it happened like this. In 1937, we had a new addition to the class. His name was Wendelin Müller-Blattau and he was the son of a music professor. I had already made initial friendly contacts with him when at Easter 1938, i.e. at the beginning of the new school year, there was another new addition. His name was Gerd Dörner and he came from the Bertholds-Gymnasium, where he had left before the end of the school year because his promotion was in jeopardy. Through intensive tutoring, Gerd managed to fill the gaps. He was able to avoid being demoted a class and came to us without losing time. His first appearance with us was unusual. Since he had a reputation for being a ladies' man and - somewhat undefined - "something special", he was met with rejection in the class and was greeted with the call "Dörner out". But the rejection was quickly over, because Gerd turned out to be "a person like you and me". His inclination towards the female element, however, did stand out somewhat in our incredibly harmless class. For whatever reasons, Wendi, Gerd and I grew into a trio that meant a lot to us and significantly accompanied the last years in school.

Special details about school life that I haven't already mentioned hardly come to mind. Of course, there were new teachers such as Professor Sauer, whom we versified as follows: "Uncle Sauer/in the long run/unbearable/.../rubber collar/worn out/not quite clean/and the teeth/oh hygiene/yellow magic...". Or Becker, who taught mathematics in such a way that I could still keep up until differential calculus, but was lost from integral calculus onwards. Or Malzacher, in Latin, whom nothing could ruffle and who, with a friendly smile and his usual waving hand gesture, stated to Wendi: "Müller, always cheerful, but otherwise not much going on." Or Eckstein, who, when Gerd waved out the window because two girls were waiting for him below, also looked out the window and then - in the middle of "Faust" - said to Gerd: "Dörner, you have good taste!" A problem - initially only latent - was Professor Malthan. A Nazi through and through and as such a "Gauredner", i.e. destined to indoctrinate listeners in a National Socialist sense in speeches wherever. I always saw myself in danger of being harmed by him in some way, which of course would have been extremely hindering with regard to the Abitur. Therefore, I was very careful and tried to appear as loyal to the party line in his lessons as was possible for me. He didn't do anything to me at first, but it did happen in the Abitur, although not decisively.

With considerable diligence, especially in foreign languages, and certain help from Karlheinz, I managed to meet the school's requirements well. Only in math, little was going on. At least I could avoid an "unsatisfactory". I only narrowly escaped one defeat. The sports festival of the Freiburg schools was approaching, and we were training under Wolfis. I was selected to run in the 4x100m relay. After training in hot weather, I was terribly thirsty and bought lemonade from a snack bar in a glass that was anything but clean. This gave me a streptococcal infection, I got a high fever and had to go to bed. Our school's relay team then lost with drums and trumpets. The final runner came in last, far behind. That would have been very unpleasant for me, because even with me the result would not have been better.

What was happening politically at that time? Quite a lot. Hitler had indeed affirmed that with the incorporation of the Sudetenland, his territorial claims were finally satisfied. This too proved to be a lie. For he began to work on the breakup of Czechoslovakia with a policy of intimidation. Success came quickly. Czechoslovakia split up, German troops marched in on March 15, 1938, and the final result was as follows: Germany took over the newly created "Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia", Hungary took Carpatho-Ukraine, and Slovakia placed itself under the protection of the German Reich. Once again Hitler had achieved his goals without it coming to war. But he had gambled very high, because by breaking the Munich Four-Power Agreement, he had finally lost his credibility internationally. The mood in Germany, however, remained good, it was another success after all. From my point of view, it is difficult to say to what extent the realization was now gaining ground in Germany that war could no longer be avoided on the next occasion. Our family, of course, had a different perspective than the general public, and Kromse clearly saw the outbreak of war as an imminent consequence. I still remember well the following incident. Our class went to dancing lessons together in the spring of 1938, including me. When we were discussing at home before the first lesson whether I should wear a shirt with a normal collar or - which was much finer - a shirt with a buttoned collar, Kromse said that this was really not a problem in view of the fact that we were on the verge of the outbreak of a war. And he added: "Go and have fun; who knows what else is coming."

Speaking of dancing lessons. When I said that the whole class participated, that's not quite right. Those who lived in the Catholic boarding school were not there. The director there probably considered it immoral or at least premature. Nevertheless, most of us went to Büttner's dance school once a week. It was all quite unexciting. Although one had to accompany one's last partner home after each lesson, this meant nothing special for us, who were even more harmless than the already harmless standard at that time. Erotic thoughts or even actions were not on the agenda. Perhaps in a few cases kisses, but not for me. In my case, there was the added factor that I had a rather long way to go to Büttner's, on foot it was about 45 minutes. The way there could still be shortened by streetcar, but if a girl to be taken home lived somewhere else, it became a long way home. I usually solved this dilemma by cycling to Büttner's, then walking with the girl pushing the bike, and finally cycling home after dropping her off. Is there anything less erotic?

In the class, some rivalries began to germinate, because there were girls who were found nice by several boys. But hardly more than a rush to the chosen one at the invitation to the last dance occurred. Just the way home, nothing more. I tended to choose those to accompany who lived in a reasonable relation to Wintererstraße. So we learned the first steps towards good behavior. Mrs. Büttner and her adjutant Mr. Freese kept a watchful eye not only on us taking the right steps, but also that we bowed slightly before each dance and led the partner by the arm to her seat at the end. The dancing lesson was more of a kind of compulsory exercise, but at least we learned to move to music and began to sense that dancing could be a good opportunity to start a communication that was then called "flirting". The word "relationship" was unknown at this time. Not only was it not spoken, it was not even thought of in this direction.

The year 1938 passed with our trio friendship growing ever stronger. New for me in this friendship was that we visited each other at home. This had never happened before, except for the Zipfel period and right at the beginning of the Freiburg period with Gerhard Stratthaus. But probably no other long-lasting friendship had established itself for me except for the friends in the Zipfel environment. This may be related to the fact that most classmates were strongly involved in their HJ units. There was not only the "service", but also many personal friendships. With Gerd and Wendi it was somewhat different. Gerd had chosen the Marine-HJ, which was known for its lax service, and Wendi had to do with a musically oriented HJ unit, where things were just as relaxed. For both of them, therefore, there was comparatively more free time available when school did not occupy us.

Gerd lived on Talstraße. Of his parents, his mother Christine was a soft and loving woman. Father Erich was tall like Gerd and impressive to me in his casual yet assertive manner. The parents gave Gerd a lot of freedom and trusted him. There was also his sister Käthe, a few years younger than us. The Dörners never gave me the impression of being Nazis. Not that the opposite was apparent, but I don't remember anything noteworthy about approval either. I was always welcome at the Dörners.

Wendi lived on Reichsgrafenstraße. His mother was in favor of National Socialism, perhaps even in the party. The professor father was a type one might call "eager", without my being able to explain that in more detail. Both were always open and friendly towards me. Wendi had three siblings, the older sister Brigitte, the younger Christiane and the only slightly younger brother Michel. I liked going to this family.

Gerd often came to us after his parents had moved to Teningen, a small town about 15km from Freiburg, and he had to use the train every day as a commuting student. When we also had school in the afternoon, he stayed with us over lunch. And when he had one of his little fainting spells due to his too rapid growth, I dragged him home where he could recover.

With Gerd and Wendi I got to know and love swing music. Gerd had records by Teddy Stauffer and other jazz greats. We played them either at his home or at mine and used - imitating famous drummers - a fly swatter as an accompanying "jazz broom". It was the time of the swing generation widespread among German youth, which was of course a thorn in the side of the HJ, but could nevertheless hold its own. Under Gerd's guidance, we developed into what was then called a "Stenz" (dandy). For example, we wore silk neckerchiefs. Mine wasn't made of silk, but it was blue with white dots, just like my racing driver idol Rudolf Caracciola wore in the photos. That had remained my hobby anyway: car racing. - Photos of famous racing drivers of the time hung above my bed, preferably works drivers from Mercedes and not from the rival Auto Union. This and many other things prove that we had still preserved much of our childhood. For example, our new orientation did not prevent us from playing wild football battles with tiny balls during the breaks at school, which was firstly actually forbidden by the break regulations and secondly ruined our shoes because of the cobblestones. How often did I come home with a split sole!

The dandy existence brought with it a growing interest in the female sex. Gerd was, so to speak, one step ahead of us in this. It was said that he knew Bertel Dorff, the daughter of the pharmacist on Münsterplatz, who had a "bad reputation". However, none of us could really define what was meant by this designation. We were still too harmless. Gerd also knew Mäusi Hillemanns, who was adored by all sides. That he was not particularly successful in this regard, but that Mäusi was simply the sister of a former classmate and friend from the Berthold-Gymnasium, played no role in our considerations. For us, it was simply pure admiration to achieve such a thing.

So the year 1938 passed in Freiburg, of course overshadowed by the political development and in concern about how things would continue with the grandparents. At home, the older generation caused concern in a different way. Grandma, at 85, had become quite difficult. The main reason was her growing deafness, which made her suspicious. I have already reported on this. How often she retreated to her rooms and, depending on who she was angry with, changed her will, although she really had nothing that could be inherited. She was angry with Kromse every year on Mother's Day, because he never took notice of it. With us, the motto was to always honor the mother and not just on this one day. Uncle Eugen and Uncle Kurt were then much praised, because they sent flowers on this day.

In connection with the concern for the grandparents, it was certainly also the case that I spent quite different summer holidays in 1938. Karl Hoffmann, the old friend from Berlin years and architect of our Freiburg house, had moved from Berlin to Bad Ems. His main profession was garden architect with a focus on golf courses, and now he lived as manager of the Bad Ems Golf Club right on the golf course. He had married very late, so there was a proper household there. So I went to Bad Ems and devoted myself to golf for some time. The young golf instructor Dingeldein, with whom I became a bit friendly, provided assistance. Our common preference was the Western novels of Zane Grey, of which I had taken several from a Freiburg lending library. I was very well accommodated at the Hoffmanns. Mrs. Hoffmann, whom I didn't know yet, and I got along well, golf was quite fun, but not overly interesting for me, and so it was all a quite successful vacation. Whether I also went to Königstein after my stay in Ems, I don't know. In any case, from today's perspective, the Ems holidays are a sign for me that the Königstein household was to be consciously relieved of holiday guests. Öms, the soul of earlier holidays of the extended family, was not only incapable of action, she herself had to be cared for and looked after around the clock.

At the turn of the year 1938/39, I went to the Feldberg with Gerd and Wendi. We stayed at the Hebelhof and tried to acquire skiing skills. However, this was only part of our efforts. The tea dance in the Feldbergerhof was also important, and the same in the evening in the Hebelhof. While Wendi and I were rather reserved, Gerd was quite active and received the nickname "the hopper" because of his dancing style. Skiing was also the focus in March, when I accepted an offer from Diet and Rollo to spend 14 ski days in a hut of the Darmstadt Technical University in the Walsertal. This invitation had the following background. Rollo, 8 years older than Diet and me, had already graduated from high school years ago, had then been in the Voluntary Labor Service for a few months, then went to Munich to study music, and finally switched to chemistry, which took him to Darmstadt. The 2 weeks in the Walsertal gave me for the first time a systematic instruction in how to handle skis. The fact that in the years and decades that followed, the style and practice of this sport changed several times has certainly greatly scratched the Walsertal way of skiing later, but I got the fun of it conveyed there.

So the year 1939 began quite cheerfully. And it initially continued as a usual course of the year. Politically, however, it became more and more threatening. After an agreement with Lithuania, German troops occupied the city of Memel in March, which had formerly belonged to East Prussia and had to be ceded to Lithuania in 1919 by the Treaty of Versailles, another success for Hitler. In the following months, the newspapers were full of reports about the sufferings now inflicted on the Germans living in the areas ceded to Poland after 1919. Such press campaigns were familiar, because before the invasion of the Sudetenland, atrocities by the Czechs against the German ethnic group had also been reported. So it was predictable when the current reports about the events in Poland would escalate in the same way, with the end result of an invasion of Poland. But this time it would inevitably mean war.

Our school routine was little affected by this. In less than a year, we had to pass the Abitur, and the requirements were by no means low. It was necessary to bring sufficient performance in all subjects. There was no option to drop subjects.

Privately, a lot went on with Gerd and Wendi. Wendi and I tried to benefit from Gerd's head start in dealing with girls. So we sneaked into a dance lesson at Büttner's by making a formal visit one afternoon, which according to our research promised an occupation with attractive girls, and, as hoped a little, were invited by Büttner to participate in this dance lesson free of charge in the future. In the further course, Wendi proved to be more capable of learning than I was when it came to the Gerd role model.

The expected escalation of press reports about Poland began to develop in the summer. Events were driving towards a climax. But first, we had to spend the summer holidays somewhere. The parents and Diet's parents Uncle Erich and Aunt Gretel arranged a joint car tour to Austria, or as it was then called: to the Ostmark. The final destination on the program was the Großglockner area. Meanwhile, the Opel had been replaced by a Mercedes 170 V because of its nausea-inducing suspension. Uncle Erich had also bought a Mercedes, but a very old type, which first had to prove whether it was suitable for a longer journey at all.

We started, and at first everything ran quite smoothly. However, this changed when the first higher mountains had to be conquered. It turned out that firstly, Uncle Erich was not a very experienced driver and secondly, his car was technically not quite up to the demands. In any case, we had to insert longer stops more often when the radiator of the older vehicle boiled again. All this was still bearable, however, because worse was to come. The German government had begun to prepare for an imminent start of the war. The preparations for this became noticeable for us in that there was suddenly a shortage of gasoline. There were long queues at the gas stations, and we could only bridge the shortfalls by buying canisters, which we filled additionally. After a stay in Zell am See, it was decided to drive back soon, because the beginning of the war was coming threateningly closer. We had not been back home for long when World War II began on September 1, 1939, with the German attack on Poland.


26. Beginning of the War and Abitur

Today we know more, back then one only had available for information what came through the state agencies. This applied to radio as well as to the press. What had triggered what no longer played a role at the moment when German troops invaded Poland, because this time it was not only, as had happened many times before, an invasion, it was war. A few days later, England and France declared war on Germany. Before the outbreak of war, however, there was still a spectacular event to be noted, which had significantly supported Hitler's decision to invade Poland and totally surprised the Western powers, namely the conclusion of a non-aggression pact between the German Reich and the Soviet Union, which had previously been the arch-enemy of every National Socialist.

One had expected the outbreak of war, but now that it had happened, one first realized what it could mean that Freiburg was only about 20km away from the Rhine and thus from the French border. A rapid involvement in the war seemed possible, even probable. For us, this meant first of all to get Grandma out of the danger zone and to Uncle Eugen in Frankfurt. This measure was certainly well thought out. That Grandma's constitution could not withstand having to go to another place at this age was not foreseeable. Grandma died 14 days later.

The first weeks after the outbreak of war were characterized by rapidly succeeding victory reports. Poland had nothing to counter the German war material and capitulated after only a few weeks. On October 6, it was all over, and all of Germany was in a victory frenzy. Those who had believed that battles with French troops would have taken place in the meantime or afterwards were disappointed. Life in Freiburg had, however, completely adjusted to the danger of a French attack. A shelling of the city, a French attempt to cross the Rhine with whatever consequences, in Freiburg one was prepared for war events, but nothing happened.

Of course, the schools were also closed and we students of the top class were required to do something useful. All those who belonged to the HJ had to do service for useful tasks. I, more than openly interested in everything to do with cars, now drove to the Mercedes workshop every day and learned the basics of an automobile mechanic. Ernst Keisinger hauled cans in the milk yard. Kromse, as reported everywhere called "Herr Hauptmann", was probably - because one saw in him the former officer - made a messenger driver with his 170 V and drove, often at night, with orders through the border area between Freiburg and the Rhine, where the French were opposite. While many cars were shut down to save gasoline, he had a special permit and the red triangle on the license plate, which was also highly coveted by others. The car's headlights were covered except for two tiny slits, as indeed total blackout was ordered for all of Germany.

In our house, there was now a black cover for each window when it got dark. The block wardens strictly controlled whether a ray of light was escaping anywhere.

I don't know how long it took for a somewhat normal life to settle in again, but it can't have been long, because the conviction gained ground that nothing was to be feared from France. In fact, at that time the French army was in an extremely poor state of training and technically totally outdated. So it was back to school, and my time at Mercedes was over. Although there was an offer that anyone who had taken up a war-important activity and continued there would be given their Abitur as a gift, Kromse did not agree to such proposals on my part, which was undoubtedly right. Nevertheless, this interlude had brought me the acquisition of a driver's license, because as an employee at Mercedes I got the special permission to get my driver's license at 17.

At school, we had to adjust to some innovations. It began with our math teacher Becker being drafted and we got a substitute who assumed that we had mastered the curriculum of our class. But this was far from the case, and so the class was gripped by sheer terror. Many now feared a 5 in the Abitur certificate, which would have been catastrophic. Fortunately, Becker was released from the military after a short time. When he entered the class again, he was greeted with a storm of jubilation. He found this great, but had no idea that this was less due to his person than to the fact of having gotten rid of the other teacher. Also in the class itself, many things changed. Some, who were filled with the obligation to serve the fatherland with weapons, volunteered and were soon drafted. Klaus Eggers, whom I liked very much, volunteered for the air force and was shot down even before we were in the Abitur. For us who remained behind, however, classes continued as usual.

It is not easy to describe how everyday life was now structured. It seemed almost "as usual", but we were living in war, and it left its traces through quite un-warlike events. Many things of daily life were no longer freely available for purchase, because in the meantime food and clothing cards had been introduced. Civilian needs had to take a back seat, because wide branches of the economy were converted to war-important matters. On the theaters of war, however, almost nothing happened. Everything was in a waiting position and preparing for things to come. An exception was what was happening on the seas. German U-boats distinguished themselves by numerous ships of the opponents sunk, and week after week the special reports went over radio and press, how many ships had again fallen victim to the U-boat war. Jubilant report followed jubilant report, on the radio always introduced by the fanfares from Liszt's "Les Preludes". This found a good resonance in the population. The beginning of the war had by no means been welcomed with enthusiasm, but now, when everything was going so smoothly, one was successfully joyful.

With Gerd and Wendi, I continued to do this and that. A new exercise consisted of not going straight home after school, but first going to the "racetrack". This was the main street in the city center, the former Kaiserstraße and now Adolf-Hitler-Straße, not far from the school in the small Freiburg. On the "racetrack", the boys who came from the FG or the RG strolled on one side, on the other side the girls, whose starting point was the Hindenburg-Gymnasium at the other end of the street. It was an interested mutual eyeing! I assume that similar things happened in other cities.

With the grandparents in Frankfurt, there was initially no deterioration of the situation to be noted. The further escalation, which then set in again later, initially took a break after it had already raged quite a bit. A change in the family had occurred insofar as Rollo had been drafted into the army, namely to the motorcycle messengers.

The "calm before the storm", which characterized everyday life for us and elsewhere, is also evident from the fact that we again went skiing on the Hebelhof on the Feldberg for the turn of the year, Gerd, Wendi, I and cousin Diet. There we encountered a group of boys and girls of the same age who came from Pforzheim, as well as 2 girls from Offenbach. All of us together made these days a wonderful short vacation in glorious weather and were incredibly cheerful. War? That was excluded, yes almost non-existent, hardly understandable from today's perspective. One should not believe that we were out of line with this. Such behavior was quite common for 17 and 18 year olds at that time. And indeed, in those days there was actually no war taking place.

We had begun the year 1940 extremely cheerfully on the Feldberg. No one could take that away from us anymore, but the further course of the year finally confronted us with the seriousness of life, although not immediately to the full extent, because the Abitur in February was indeed a serious undertaking, but manageable and without lasting serious effects. We had to do the written work in the Hindenburg-Gymnasium. The FG was, like other schools, closed at this time because coal had to be saved. In Latin and Greek, the translations went satisfactorily. I had no difficulties and managed without outside help. Math was another matter. I was hopelessly stuck and sent imploring glances across the aisle between the benches to Wendi. He wrote the continuation of the task on a slip of paper, then threw all his writing utensils into the aisle, I helped him pick them up and kept the slip in question. That was the solution. So I could save a 3 in the certificate. German, one of my favorite subjects, on the other hand, became a problem. The essay topic, given by Malthan, was "Life is struggle in all creation". I picked out important personalities from history like Luther and Frederick the Great and described their life struggles. Malthan, however, naturally wanted the "fateful struggle of the German people" that was going on at that time to be explained and appreciated accordingly. Unfortunately, this idea did not occur to me. As a result, I found a "sufficient" in the certificate and had to look up what was meant by it, namely a 4. In my entire school career, German had always been a 2 in the report cards - with one or two exceptions. I was totally shocked, because the Abitur grade should not reflect just a single piece of work but had to take the past into account as well. But I could do nothing about it. The Gauredner Malthan had dealt me a final blow. The oral examinations were no problem, especially not history and geography. With that, the certificate was saved and school was over. We did celebrate our school graduation and thus our "maturity" vigorously and using larger quantities of spirits, but the school itself never saw us again.


27. Labor Service Man and Precision Mechanic Apprentice

Shortly after the Abitur, I voluntarily enlisted for the Reich Labor Service. Voluntarily? Yes, voluntarily, because it was mandatory anyway. I was 17 and would have been due only a year later, but I wanted to get this thing over with as quickly as possible. I had already been examined before the war began and had received the corresponding certificate with my military passport. There was general conscription; everyone had to join the military unless they were exempted due to illness. Refusal, civilian service, such things did not exist. A three-quarter year of labor service preceded military service. The military passport was initially valid for the labor service and later for military service. The military passport also noted which fitness group the holder was assigned to. Mine said "k.v.", which meant fit for war service. I explain this in such detail because this entry later became vital for me.

Before I received the call-up in April, my parents sent me for enlightenment. I now had to go out into hostile life, where all sorts of dangers lurked, not least from evil women. So I was instructed to visit our family doctor, Dr. Fickler, so that he could explain to me how things work between man and woman and what I should pay attention to. So I went there, was asked to "undress" for the examination, was tapped etc. and then allowed to get dressed again. Dr. Fickler said: "You're going to the labor service now. There, many things will be said and happen that you don't understand right away. But that's not so bad. Take care, and best regards to your parents." - I came home, was asked: "Did he talk to you?" I said "Yes," and that was the enlightenment.

When we drove to our destinations, the German invasion of the neutral countries Denmark and Norway was just taking place, another reason for the public to cheer about successes and strengthen the feeling of victory. The labor service camp was in Deckendorf, somewhere in the deepest Bavaria and hardly to be found on the map. Before I left, I still had my hair cut according to regulations, i.e. "to match length", because I didn't want to stand out negatively right upon arrival. This first plan succeeded, but later I was much less successful.

We lived in barracks that housed about 30 men. I was assigned to a squad that consisted of men of about the same height, among whom I was one of the tallest. I got along well with my barrack mates, they were almost all older than me and mostly workers. The leaders, especially the sub-leaders, however, were a nasty bunch. Most of them came from the former Czechoslovakia or Austria and had names like Vitek and Variacic, who was our chief squad leader. I haven't forgotten his name in particular, because he harassed me badly throughout the entire service period.

This may have been contributed to by the fact that when asked, everyone answered that they had been in the Hitler Youth, only I couldn't confirm this to everyone's surprise. Lying about this would have been pointless anyway, because it would have quickly come to light that the others were familiar with all the commands and the basic concepts of drilling, only I wasn't.

At the beginning, however, we all had a lot to endure. We were drilled until we almost collapsed from weakness. Left turn, right turn, double time march-march, about face, left turn... And that for hours. The labor service included the spade, but only for drilling. The movements that the soldier made with the rifle, we had to practice with the spade, and the spade always had to shine with cleanliness. The long marches were very strenuous and in the boots, the "dice shakers", a torture. Especially for me, because no fitting footwear could be found for my small and narrow foot. I was thrown a pair in front of my feet by the clothing chamber, and that was it. The result was blisters and sore feet, but nobody was interested. "What, you have a blister?! I have one too!!" In short, we were "ground down" according to all the rules of the art, in order, as it was said, to make people out of us who can behave in a soldierly manner.

After we had also learned to salute, were explicitly instructed about evil women and venereal diseases, and were urgently requested to be back in the camp before lights out, we were given permission to go out. Where we went, certainly to some pub. Ede Klotz from my barracks had ordered his girlfriend from Stuttgart for this day. She was waiting for him in the forest, where he disappeared over the fence in his nightshirt. His uniform was neatly arranged on the stool, and we had arranged the bed so that it looked as if a person was lying there. So Ede remained undetected. It made a great impression on me to take such a risk for this "plan", because Ede would have received a very severe punishment.

At first, we hardly noticed anything of the war in Deckendorf. We had enough to do to save our skin from day to day as much as possible, i.e. not to attract attention. Because once you attracted attention, you had already caught the attention of the sub-leaders. If you then attracted attention again, you were subject to special interest. But that was already very close to being harassed, because the sub-leaders were skilled at always finding something to criticize. So one was on guard, and there wasn't much attention left for much else. That politics nevertheless touched us, we didn't notice at first. We began to practice parade marching, i.e. throwing our legs. At first we thought it was just another way of grinding us down. But then it seeped through that those who performed best in the parade march would march in Nuremberg at the NSDAP party rally and parade before Hitler. The party rally was scheduled to be called the "Party Rally of Peace". Apparently, the German government had hopes of negotiating peace with the Western powers. So we drilled vigorously, and in order not to attract attention, I made a great effort. I was then actually selected to be there in Nuremberg. But as the war continued and reached new heights with the German invasion of the neutral countries Holland and Belgium and from there to France, this party rally was cancelled and with it my appearance before Hitler!

We came into indirect contact with the war when the department was transferred to Landsberg. Departments from elsewhere were also ordered to Landsberg. The labor service was given the task of building runways for a large airfield. Today I know that this project was part of the preparations for the air war against England. But at that time, there was no such thinking for us. We had to concrete runways, nothing more. For this, we had to unload paper sacks with cement and soot from railway freight cars and carry them on. We shoveled it all together, mixed it with water and distributed the concrete. A rather heavy work, but it was doable. The cleanliness inspections were bad. Of course, many paper sacks broke when they were slammed with force from the wagons onto our backs, and if there was soot in the sacks, you can imagine what we looked like. For the sub-leaders, of course, it was a joy to set such inspections shortly after the end of work. And of course they found soot remains somewhere on those they had it in for. Because the war soap that was available at that time had only minimal cleaning power, and besides, the time until the inspection was much too short to free each other from the last soot particles. I certainly don't need to go into details and describe where soot was discovered on me. In any case, I was usually in for it and then had to "drill afterwards", i.e. complete special tasks that the sub-leaders thought up. The others had time off.

We lived in barracks in four-person rooms, I together with nice people, who, however, had the disadvantage that one of them served as a "cleaner" for a sub-leader and the other as a "foreman" had a somewhat higher rank than I, the simple "workman". One of us was always assigned to "room duty", i.e. had to keep the room clean. "Clean" meant that everything had to be spick and span during the evening room inspection by the sub-leader. Cleaners were exempt from room duty, foremen too. This amounted to me being on room duty every two days. A constant trembling whether something would be criticized during the room inspection. And if so, there was punitive room duty. I had room duty almost every day.

Two other departments were also building on the runways. And soon after our arrival, Ernst Keisinger appeared in our room! His department had moved into the neighboring building. Ernst was a "good-natured person". Nothing could ruffle him, and he had the admirable gift of dodging adversities. He also pushed, as it was called at the time, "a quiet ball" even during runway construction, because he had the task of taking concrete samples. For this he had a wheelbarrow and an iron mold at his disposal. His activity looked like this: in the morning he took a sample, then retreated with sample and wheelbarrow into an earth hole and slept or read there. Most of the time he succeeded in this. During roll calls in his department, he came over to us until everything was over there. Once, however, he attracted terrible attention. A high leader came, and all three departments were lined up in a square open on one side. A spade grip was ordered, in which the spade had to be placed with the inside towards the feet. Everyone in the first row did this correctly, only Ernst, who had mostly dodged the drilling, didn't know and had positioned the spade with the inside facing outwards. The sun was shining and was reflected in this one spade. Anyone who has ever done military service will be able to judge what that meant!

Meanwhile, German troops had overrun France, occupied Paris and driven the British army into the sea at Dunkirk. The France campaign ended on June 22. The victory reports were overwhelming. Hitler had achieved new, incredible successes.

There would be much more to tell about the labor service time, especially with what antics especially Variacic tried to break me down. In fact, he really brought me to the brink of despair, but the end of the service period was foreseeable, and probably that helped me. It even went faster than expected. It was already over in August, so back to Freiburg. I could use my normal clothes again and enjoyed it immensely. However, it turned out that I had become much broader in the shoulders through the hard work. I also held myself straight and was suddenly taller. Physically, the labor service had certainly not harmed me, but psychologically I was quite battered. The whole thing had only lasted a little more than 4 months, but it was a time full of stress, humiliation and fear. I had been about the youngest there. Moreover, most of the others were used to a work process - and thus being subordinate - while I came from a protected parental home and familiar FG. But at least one fear did not materialize, no one found out that according to Nazi legislation I had two Jewish grandparents and a Jewish mother, so I was a "Mischling 1st degree". The fear that this "flaw", which wasn't really one, would become known to the people around me had understandably intensified in the labor service. For the sub-leaders, it would have brought the highest pleasure to publicly pillory me. This fear has increased more and more in the further course of the years and especially came to the fore when I was confronted with a new environment that was not yet familiar to me. Later, more was added due to the war, which will still be discussed.

Again a decision was pending. I had been found k.v. and thus had the certainty of being called up for military and war service, when, that was uncertain. A call-up would have meant being assigned to some troop unit, e.g. the infantry. To avoid such particularly unpleasant things, there was only one solution, namely to voluntarily report to a troop unit where less unpleasant things were to be expected. Therefore, I voluntarily reported to a motorized troop unit where I could use my driver's license and my knowledge of auto mechanics.

Very quickly then came the notice that according to the files I was a Jewish Mischling and according to the newly issued guidelines I was to be reclassified from k.v. to n.z.V. The abbreviation n.z.V. meant "not for use", or in other words "unworthy of military service". I should have submitted my military passport for the entry to be changed, but I either forgot or consciously did not do so, following an inspiration, probably the former. And so the remark k.v. remained. Rollo, who had already been drafted, was discharged from the army at that time on the basis of this decree.

So military service did not take place. What now instead? Of course, study! But very quickly it turned out that I was not allowed to do that. "Half-Jews" were no longer admitted to university. So we had to think again. Mr. Mohr, who lived as a subtenant with Pu Thüna and was a partner in the company F. Hellige & Co., came to the rescue now. Hellige produced scientific measuring instruments. Mr. Mohr, a decided opponent of the Nazis, was willing to hire me as an apprentice precision mechanic and thus remove me from public traffic. We highly appreciated this, because after all he risked helping a "Jewish-related" family. On September 1, 1940, I stood at the vise for the first time.


28. Transition to a Real Professional Life with the Expanding War in the Background. (1940 and 1941)

I was now an apprentice, 18 years old and stood as a worker among workers at the beginning of a real professional life. Other apprentices began their activities with me, all at least 2 years younger. They looked at me somewhat suspiciously. There must have been something strange about a high school graduate of this age who suddenly took a completely unusual direction as an apprentice. Did he want to avoid military service, or what else was wrong with him. And he had a strangely familiar relationship with Mr. Mohr, the boss. - I never found out what the masters, the journeymen and the apprentices thought and talked about among themselves. They were as correct towards me as they were towards others. And as an apprentice, I was treated like other apprentices. So not necessarily like an eighteen-year-old, but such was easy to endure after all I had experienced in humiliations in the labor service.

What did an apprentice in precision mechanics have to do? He had to learn the basics of this profession, i.e. filing, drilling, turning, milling and assembling. And he had to take over the lower tasks from the journeymen and clean up and sweep the workshop daily after work. This was often dull, especially at the beginning, but that hardly bothered me; my parents and I were glad and grateful that I had found a bearable basis at Hellige for the time being. I got along well with my colleagues. Hardly anyone showed exaggerated National Socialist tendencies. Most held back, some even openly showed their opposition. I only had to be careful with master craftsman Zoll. He was unpredictable and could have posed a danger. But nothing serious ever happened.

Over time, I really became friends with two younger journeymen. We also went skiing on weekends or to the cinema. My previous environment no longer existed. Wendi had already gone to the aviators in April. Through a voluntary enlistment, he came to the desired troop unit. Gerd began the two-year apprenticeship period preceding pharmaceutical studies in Kempten, Bavaria. He had, by the way, and I want to record this at this point, decisively declared himself for me during a short stay in Freiburg. I had made it clear to him that those who stood by me could face political difficulties and that I therefore wouldn't hold it against him if our paths were to part now. His vote was very important to me.

A special chapter was the vocational school, which I also had to attend as an apprentice. Here, of course, I stood out particularly as a high school graduate. While it is quite common today for high school graduates to learn a manual trade, this did not exist at that time. People may have gossiped about me in vocational school as well. However, nothing came to light openly. This may have been related to the teacher, a kind older gentleman, whom I suspect knew about me and protected me from annoyances.

Being an apprentice took up the whole day, including Saturdays until 3:00 p.m. Free time and also vacation were written very small. I can only remember a visit to Gerd in Kempten and a ski stay at the Hebelhof from vacation trips. There was also one or the other trip to Frankfurt, but never for a longer period of time. The grandparents lived there quietly, continuously further restricted by new decrees. I have now tried to reconstruct from books what exactly was involved, but have not found a complete list. The most important examples to be mentioned here are the regulation of 1.9.40 to wear a yellow Jewish star on clothing in public or the ban of 19.7.40 on having a telephone connection. Pets and radio sets were also forbidden. Öms was a nursing case. Of course, she was aware of the sadness of her health situation. To what extent she overlooked the political situation, I don't know. For Opa, however, it must have been terrible. However, as Mux always reported after visits there, he endured everything with incredible bravery and dignity and did not lose his characteristic cheerfulness.

These laws and regulations applied to Jews living in completely Jewish families, so not to Mux, because she was married to an "Aryan". One must look closely at these terms of Nazi terminology. In Frankfurt, Öms was a baptized Jew, with us Mux was baptized directly after birth like any other "normal" Christian. And what the term "Aryan" meant for Kromse, only the National Socialist racial theory knew.

For me, existence was loosened up by the fact that the chemistry student Detlev v. Uexküll moved into the two now vacant rooms of Grandma. For him, it was an unimaginably beautiful "student pad", the parents liked doing something good for the son of former acquaintances from Berlin. Theo v. Rinck, a former classmate, severely disabled by polio and therefore not fit for military service, had established the connection. Detlev and I became friends, and I came into his circle of chemistry students. This togetherness was balm for me. I was accepted and could be cheerful among like-minded people on numerous occasions.

A certain difficulty lay, however, in the fact that my inclination towards femininity, which had slumbered for a long time and then only showed shameful beginnings, began to stir more strongly. I came into a circle where there were firm friendships between men and women, i.e. what we now call "relationships". Generally, I was fully integrated into this circle, but this was closed to me, perhaps not by the girls, but I had firmly resolved not to violate the Nuremberg Laws, because otherwise I would have endangered not only myself but also my family. So despite the friendships extended to me, I stood aside in this respect, a discrimination of a special kind that struck deep inside.

Already in the fall of 1940, the air battle over England had begun. It aimed to prepare a German invasion of the island. Initial German successes could not be maintained. Today we know that it ended in a German failure. At that time, however, radio and press were full of success reports, and especially the newsreel running in cinemas brought impressive material about the operations of German aircraft. Everything was, as before, carried by euphoria.

So the year 1940 passed in the gray everyday life of the factory and a little loosened up by Detlev and his environment. In winter, Sundays often went to skiing. My age group had not yet been drafted into the military, which meant that I could show myself everywhere in public without having to fear being considered a shirker from military service. Detlev and the others of my age group were students, I was an apprentice. Externally, there was no visible difference.

However, this changed when my year 1922 was then due. Detlev got his draft notice and Gerd, who had returned to Freiburg, as well. They were ordered to Ulm to the artillery. And then something completely unexpected happened: I also received a draft notice, namely to a bicycle company. This shocked us at first. Then we began to think. The explanation was simple. At the military district command, they had apparently forgotten to reclassify me from k.v. to n.z.V. The question now was whether I should become a soldier without objection or report the error. We then decided to report the error. Apart from the fact that it would have been insane if I had taken up arms to fight for Hitler's Reich and risked my life, there was also the risk of a negative reaction from the Wehrmacht. The accusation of "infiltration" of the army would have been a minor one if the truth had come out. So we telephoned the responsible office, which then changed its entry in my file and reversed my draft. It was significant that we had telephoned and I had not gone there with my military passport. Because they forgot again to demand my military passport to change the entry. So the k.v. remained, which became increasingly important for me in the further course of the war and probably saved my life in the end.

So I did not become a soldier, but my life at home now became more bitter, because from now on I had a different, a vulnerable status in public as a non-soldier of the 1922 age group. I was increasingly viewed critically and was therefore very cautious and increasingly distrustful. My youthful appearance was initially an advantage. The 18 years were not recognizable at first glance. Later, that didn't help much either.

In June 1941, Öms died. But how should this "Jew", who was Protestant, be buried? Pastor Schmidt from Frankfurt, a friend of ours, was immediately ready to take on this task. The political risk did not bother him, a true act of friendship. Death has spared Öms from terrible things. Unthinkable if she, marked by her illness and practically a nursing case, had still lived when the Holocaust began. - Opa was now alone, again a deep cut in his life and that at the age of 78. His eyesight had decreased considerably. I assume it was cataracts. But nothing could be done about it at that time. Opa later moved to a Jewish pension and had nothing more there than a room. I don't know when the move took place. From the pension, he wrote numerous letters to Mux, of which quite a few are still preserved, all carried by a wonderful attitude, a shattering collection.

The war continued with successes in Africa, where a German army helped allied Italy defend its colonial possessions against the attack of the English, and in the Balkans (Yugoslavia and Greece). So far, everything was cause for jubilation. But the turning point began to emerge when Hitler's Germany began the war with the Soviet Union. The existing non-aggression pact was ignored, and German troops began invading on June 22. Initially, they overran the Russian positions and penetrated deeper and deeper into the country. Whole armies were encircled and captured, and the reports of successful "cauldron battles" were overwhelming. But those who knew history knew that this could not end well. Kromse said on the very first day: "This is the end."

This was how it was throughout the war. We were Germans, and Germans were at war against - as it was called then - "a world of enemies". This Germany was on the one hand our Germany, and on the other hand it was Hitler's Germany, thus anything but our Germany. There it was, the dilemma. Our thinking had to carry the hope that this war would end in defeat, and this hope had to grow stronger the longer - this time also our - Germany groaned under the burden of war and had to suffer the heaviest losses, not only in people, but under the burden of the soon beginning bomb attacks on the cities also through area-wide devastations. - But this is already a small anticipation of further developments. I have nevertheless already hinted at this cruel dilemma here, because it was an important component of our lives. For many Nazi opponents, this dilemma applied of course as well.

At some point in the further course of 1941, I met Peter Nebel. He was my age, from Cologne, also a high school graduate and was supposed to learn the carpentry trade in his divorced father's factory in Freiburg. How he had managed not to be in the military yet, I don't know. Somehow we found that what made up our lives day by day was very similar to each other. Besides, he was a clear anti-Nazi, and that alone brought us closer together. What distinguished us was that he had quite a lot going on with and with girls and was also successful. So I could swim a little in his wake and was not so lonely. We failed, however, when we joined a dance class and got in the way of some students. The end of the story was a physical confrontation between the students and the apprentices, during which a student made the remark: "They are not even capable of giving satisfaction!" This was of course also correct insofar as Peter and I had to go to work very early every morning, while the others went to university.

Peter and I were together a lot. When we were not in our respective factories, we sat together, listened to jazz records, went to the movies and did, I don't know what else. In my memory, all this is stored as a reasonably long time. But it can't have been that long, because one day Peter was also drafted, and I was left behind once again.

The war in the East dominated the news. The German armies advanced unstoppably until the Russian winter put an end to it. An army leadership subservient to Hitler and criminal had let the troops march eastward without any winter equipment. A deluded optimism had assumed that the Soviet Union could be subdued in a very short time. Of course, one did not know then what one knows today. The news on the radio, the press and the newsreels did bring material about the winter war, but the true extent of the cold catastrophe was of course suppressed. From the "homeland", as it was always called, winter-appropriate "sacrifices" were expected. This involved collecting winter clothing, skis in personal possession had to be surrendered and similar things. The timing was of course much too late, and it can be assumed that the material reached the troops only after the cruelly hard Russian winter had already passed its peak. Nevertheless, the German Wehrmacht was not so weakened that it could not have launched a new attack after overcoming the winter in 1942.

Why do I go into the war events in more detail from time to time? Because life at home - in the "homeland" - must be seen against this background. And above all, from today's perspective, it is important to distinguish between what one has learned, experienced and researched about the events in the 50 years since then, and what one knew at the time. From today's perspective, one may shake one's head about the fact that life continued more or less normally; from the perspective of the time, it was not to be expected otherwise. Everything had to go on; Germany was under the compulsion to win the war, not only through the fighting troops, but just as much through the population at home. Not to lose it, that was a compulsion that only set in later and then became more and more urgent.

As far as I was concerned, little was going on privately. There wasn't much time available for it either. Skiing on winter Sundays, which had occasionally cheered up the monotony a bit, was over when the skis had to be handed in. This was a pity, because I enjoyed these commonalities either with the two work colleagues or with one or the other companion. It didn't bother us that we had to get up at 6 o'clock on Sundays to catch the sports train that took us to Bärental. There we had to shoulder our skis and march for an hour. Arrived at the Feldberg, it was enough for 5 or 6 descents in the Fahler Loch, no more, because we had to climb the steep and long slope that we had skied down on foot with the skis on our backs, step by step on steps trodden in the snow.

In the factory, I led the life of an apprentice. What that entailed, I have already mentioned. For the rest, every worker there was glad to be allowed to stay at home and not have to go to the front, because the factory produced war-important goods. And so one lived from one day to the next. Not at all grimly and often cheerfully, but just with very short-term aspects. There was an older unskilled worker, Peter Burkart, who was very careless in his extremely critical remarks about the regime. One had to fear that he would get into difficulties because of this, but somehow it went well. A kind of friendship developed with him, which was also joined by two very Catholic precision mechanics with the same political attitude. We were invited to Burkart's house from time to time, who was married to a farmer on the outskirts of Freiburg, and enjoyed home-made wine and meat products outside the usual food ration.

A very attractive girl also worked in the factory. We eyed each other, I her for understandable reasons, she me because I did fall a little out of the frame of the other apprentices. But more than the eyeing did not develop, could not develop. That I was right with my caution should soon prove to be correct. Because one day a new precision mechanic apprentice came to the factory, whom I knew from the FG. Clemens Oehlkers was the son of a biology professor and a Jewish woman, thus had the same status as I according to Nazi legislation and had, certainly also through mediation of Mr. Mohr, found refuge at Hellige. Now there were two high school graduates among the apprentices. With Clemens, everything went as naturally as with me. But his apprenticeship broke off after a few months, due to very tragic circumstances. On a Monday, Clemens was missing in the factory. The following had happened. Clemens had a girlfriend whose father was an SA man. Somehow it became known to him that Clemens was committing a punishable offense under the Nuremberg Laws if he had a girlfriend. He threatened the couple to notify the Gestapo if there was no separation. On a weekend, the couple went to the Oehlkers family's cottage in the Black Forest, committed suicide with poison and thus escaped the inevitable punishment. Clemens would have gone to prison or perhaps even to a concentration camp. His girlfriend would have suffered as well, because the prohibition laws applied to her just the same. Apart from a threatening prison sentence, she would also have faced widespread social rejection in public. Later, when the war successes were over, the punishments for political "crimes" were even generally tightened and quickly led to the death penalty. This also applied to offenses against the Nuremberg Laws and, for example, if one was caught listening to foreign radio or making derogatory - "defeatist" - remarks, such as "the war is lost".

It would of course be far too extensive to continuously address details of the war events. There were many fronts: in Russia, in France, in Africa, in the Balkans, at sea, in the air. However, occasional references are necessary to indicate at what stage the developments on the battlefields were and what influence this had on life at home and on the mood among the population as well as within the close family circle.

One such important event was the Japanese attack on the American fleet anchored at Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. This meant not only a state of war between Japan and the USA, but also affected Germany and Italy, allied with Japan, who declared war on the USA on December 11. What this meant could already be anticipated at the time. It is probably not an exaggeration to state today that the enormous production capacity of the USA contributed decisively to Germany losing the war so totally. Despite the sometimes very successful submarine warfare against the convoys heading for Russia laden with war material, far more than enough aid still reached there. And how strongly the American air force later contributed to destroying German cities was especially noticeable from 1943 until the end of the war. It remains to be added that the American army was significantly involved in the invasion of France in June 1944. And all this, despite the USA having to wage an incredibly bitter war against Japan.


29. Life During the War 1942/43

What happened when? It's not easy for me to find a chronological order. Only for the war events can one look it up in books, not for private matters, because I didn't keep a diary. Perhaps that was quite good, because otherwise I would have been in danger of becoming even more detailed than I already am. I want to divide this chapter into three sections, because three components determined my life at that time. Dominating, of course, was the daily work at Hellige. The background for the whole life - at work and in private - was the war. And of course there was also the private sphere despite everything.

Let's start with the first component. Work in the factory proceeded in the normal monotony. Getting up around 6:00 AM. Breakfast from a thermos prepared by Mux and with bread. By bike in 15 minutes to Hellige, taking along a small pot with pre-cooked lunch to be warmed up during the lunch break. There, the usual apprentice existence. The number of young colleagues was decimated by conscriptions. Even my two young journeymen, with whom I had undertaken so many things, had to join the military, but not the two strongly Catholic colleagues, as they had health deficiencies to record. Most of the others, as far as they were not of higher age, increasingly trembled, because military service threatened everyone. They still possessed the red "u.k. certificate" (u.k. for "indispensable"), as Hellige was active in the production of war-important material. I also had such a certificate, which would later become the most important identification for me.

During the course of the year, the workforce decimated by departures was supplemented by older men from other professions who were conscripted for service. Some were from similar professions such as watchmakers, but some were also completely unskilled workers who had to be laboriously introduced to the sometimes quite intricate work. Even apprentices who already had some knowledge were used for this. Later, as the German troops suffered ever higher losses and more and more men engaged in war-important work were drafted, women were conscripted for service, even housewives. To an increasing extent, able-bodied men forcibly brought from the occupied territories came to Germany. Belgians and Frenchmen appeared at Hellige. For me, this brought a certain upgrading, because due to my knowledge of school French, there were numerous opportunities to convey the introduction to the work to be done. Something quite special happened when one day two Russians were brought into the factory. They too were to be integrated into the work process. One of them, Achmidow, a young guy, was renitent and always a source of unrest. The other, Mamidow, was peaceful and friendly.

The second component, the war, became more and more determining as the background for life. At first, the German troops advanced again in Russia and pushed far to the Crimea and the Caucasus, but then the strength was exhausted, supplies didn't keep up, and lack of materials became a big problem. Moreover, the huge Soviet Union was able to mobilize new troops. At Stalingrad, it came to a catastrophe. The newspapers were full of death notices, everywhere people wore black. Even one of the two young journeymen with whom I had been friendly until their conscription fell in Russia.

The air war had intensified. The Allied attacks on German cities steadily increased and with them the destruction. The population endured it in an astonishing way. Of course, discontent and dissatisfaction arose. But the will to resist also increased according to the motto "now more than ever". The war propaganda had it easy here. The word "terror attack" was heard and read daily and was indeed not entirely wrong. It strengthened the resistance of the population, a development contrary to the expectations of the Allies.

Now the private component. I'll start with the grief and sadness. They don't stretch continuously over the weeks and months, but when they struck us, they did so with force. First, Spatz Thüna fell in Russia. I still remember as if it were today that Mr. Mohr came to me at the vise with the news. This must have been around April 1942. The Thünas had become our closest friends. Pu had been widowed years ago, son Uz severely wounded but recovered, and now Spatz's death. Of course, every soldier was constantly in mortal danger, but only when it actually happened did the full force of the event become apparent. If a fallen soldier in the war was a Nazi and had died for "his" cause, then at least there was still meaning in his death, but Spatz and many others died for a system they abhorred. Spatz's name was Stefan, and another friend who also fell had the same name. Much later it was clear to me that if I ever had a son, he should be named Stefan.

Opa still experienced Spatz's death. He wrote about it in one of his surviving letters. Then it hit him himself. There is still a July letter. In it, he says that "rumors are circulating". He didn't specify them further, but in retrospect one can imagine what was meant. Today we know the date of the Wannsee Conference - January 20, 1942 - in which the "Final Solution to the Jewish Question" was decided. But at that time, nothing was known about it. Deportations of Jews had begun, but mostly it was said that the destination was Theresienstadt in the former Czechoslovakia. A model settlement for Jews would be created there. Opa also received the news that he should report for deportation there; when that was, I don't remember anymore. It could have been July/August 1942. Mux immediately went to Frankfurt to stand by him. Aunt Gretel was probably sick, which she often was. Mux spent the last night with Opa and later told that in the evening some married couples had come to Opa to say goodbye and then gone back to their rooms. For Opa and Mux, it was as good as certain at that moment that these couples would subsequently commit suicide. And so it was. Mux packed Opa's hunter's backpack for him and accompanied him to the collection point. She bid him farewell with the hunter's greeting "Waidmannsheil", and Opa answered with the hunter's response "Waidmannsdank". Opa was 80 and almost blind. One must imagine that, if such a thing is even possible.

Of course, at that time nothing was known about Auschwitz. This name was never mentioned. Nothing was known about the "ramp" there, where the death candidates met the "selection" with final destination gas chamber and crematorium. One knew about terrible things, without being able to define them, but it was in any case associated with suffering and death. Theresienstadt had been named as Opa's destination. So a small, a tiny spark of hope glimmered. But one forced oneself to this more or less. - Today I have a completely different view. It was initiated after the war by the knowledge of reality. One knows the connections and - above all! - the images. It is quite clear that Opa was only very briefly in Theresienstadt and then immediately came to Auschwitz. People of his age were not capable of working. So ... I will never forget a photo showing naked Jews being driven into the gas chambers. Opa's fate has thus become vivid for me and remains so forever. It's impossible to get rid of, and I don't want to get rid of it. But I can live with it. It has taught me what humans are capable of, and it has made me wide awake and kept me wide awake in judging political behavior.

Where has this memory driven me! Far into today. Therefore, back to the year 1942. So Opa had been deported to Theresienstadt. A great sadness was in us, combined with fearful thoughts in the background. But life went on. And each of us had to deal with himself and with how he would cope with the daily difficulties and threats of life.

For me, there were also a few private bright spots. Werner Gülden is to be mentioned in this context. He was a naval member and exempted from the fighting troops due to his medical studies. In Freiburg there were two companies for medical students, one from the army and one from the navy. Werner was friends with Detlev Uexküll's former girlfriend Puhli, through whom I got to know him. As a devout Catholic, he was an opponent of the Nazis, thus fitting well with our family and was gladly seen as a visitor.

A very invigorating element with us was Maria Hauck, the daughter of a Frankfurt family closely befriended with us. Maria's mother had gone to school with Mux. I often visited the Hauck family in Frankfurt and very much enjoyed and admired the open house with the incredible hospitality there. Maria had been studying in Freiburg since 1941, lived with us and had numerous and changing male visitors. Maria's cousin Bettina Lanckes was also in Freiburg as a bookseller apprentice. Then there was also Kresche Merton, also from Frankfurt. Since we all had Jewish ancestors to show somewhere, there was some commonality. On one weekend, Alexander Schmidt-Fellner joined from Frankfurt. His father - an "Aryan" - had died in a concentration camp, his Jewish mother was later deported to Theresienstadt and survived. Why do I mention this, although it was only a side issue for me? Because I still have to add that we all spent a very merry day together. It was simply typical in this situation that Alexander did not rail against the fate that had taken his father from him in such an abominable way. We just used every opportunity that presented itself so rarely to escape from the oppression that weighed on us.

Gerd Dörner also contributed significantly to making me feel more comfortable privately. As a soldier, he had advanced with the troops to the Crimea and had contracted severe jaundice there. After a hospital stay, he needed many weeks to cure the disease somewhat. As he was still not quite healthy, he managed to be transferred to Freiburg to the student company, which included pharmacy students in addition to medical students. Who wonders that Gerd, when he wasn't studying, mostly stayed not in the barracks but at our home. Since a student has more free time during the day than a precision mechanic apprentice, Gerd was, if I consider it rightly, more together with my parents than I, who had to leave home early, only came home late and only had short weekends. Nevertheless, I had more private address outside the factory than before, and Gerd loosened everything up even more by soon also appearing at our place in female company.

For Gerd, Mux and Kromse became a kind of vice parents. Not only was he always welcome; if his behavior provoked criticism, Kromse intervened and told him his opinion in no uncertain terms, which Gerd gratefully accepted. He belonged, so to speak, to the family and was even allowed to listen to the foreign radio stations in the evening. This was an enormous proof of trust, because listening to such stations was subject to severe penalties, with prison, concentration camp and even execution threatened at the very end of the war. Only through this could one obtain information about the actual course of the war events. The official German reports and news naturally painted a much too positive picture, as the morale of the population was not to be weakened. Anyone who spread foreign reports and was reported for it faced certain death.

At some point during this time, there was also the girl Mechthild Fischer, called Me. I had met her through Theo Rinck. She was a student of journalism and no child of sadness. Theo was with her at my place for tea one Sunday afternoon. She left - intentionally? - her gloves behind. I immediately caught fire, jumped on my bike, brought them to her and was - for the first time - really in love. She had, to put it cautiously, nothing against it. We saw each other more often, exchanged hot kisses and were tender, just on the edge of what I believed I could justify according to the laws. It was said that she was engaged to a soldier, but there was no sign of that. With me, however, a warning light was glowing. To steal a German girl's soldier fiancé could have become quite bitter for me. Gerd had met Me through me, and Wendi also joined in when he stopped in Freiburg on his way to visit his parents in Strasbourg while on leave. Me and I decided to visit Wendi in Strasbourg, drove there one weekend and took quarters in a small hotel, of course, as was self-evident at that time, in two separate rooms, albeit next to each other. I paced back and forth in my room for a long time that night with the thought of forgetting my caution, which was also a caution towards my family, but then stuck to caution and did not knock on the side door. Sunday in Strasbourg still passed together, but from then on Me was no longer interested in me. It was over. The thorn in me sat deep. It was the despair over the constraints. But I certainly behaved correctly in view of the threat. It just wasn't meant to be. However, if it had been meant to be and we had found each other - even if only temporarily - it would have been extremely important for me and my disturbed self-confidence, not only for then but also for later years after the war.

It was always there, the pressure from outside. With the length of the war, my distrust grew of being viewed askance by the environment. I was now 21, and young men of this age simply belonged to the military and in the war effort, to risk their lives for the German fatherland that was fighting for its existence or non-existence. If they obviously did not do this, it was natural to suspect that they had cleverly managed to find a position through connections where they could shirk military service. Or they did not belong to the Volksgemeinschaft as "Jewish connected". Or they were sick. And I certainly wasn't sick, you could see that at first glance. So I had to appear to the environment either as a shirker or as standing "outside the Volksgemeinschaft", a decisive flaw. Who wondered that I felt pressure the longer the war lasted and more and more families lost their men.

That was my life then, the life of a 21-year-old. And the parents? As far as it concerned the really important things, I was not included. What is meant is the fact that the Gestapo suggested to Kromse that he divorce Mux. Mux would then have been left without the protection of her "Aryan" husband and immediately confronted with the danger of deportation. Kromse always categorically rejected such a proposal, which was made to him several times. In this context or in others, the parents were summoned to the Gestapo multiple times.

The parents did not let me know all of this at the time. Only much later after the war did I learn about it. They wanted to spare me, not let me participate in such excitement. That was very lovingly meant from the perspective of that time, because I had my own problems to bear, and certainly I would have been heavily burdened in my private life by such knowledge. From today's perspective and under the keyword "togetherness" it may appear different. But who wants to - and should - judge in retrospect what was right and what was not. Today they are nothing but lived facts.

So all that remains is to state that the parents continued to live their usual everyday life, depressed by the worry (which was of course also mine!) that Mux could also be picked up, sad and worried about Opa's uncertain fate, worried about people close to them who were either in war service or threatened by bomb attacks, and without hope for an early tolerable end to the war. Also materially constrained by the war events, because all food as well as the most important consumer goods were rationed and only available through cards. The car had long since been handed over to the military, and even Mux's help, our faithful Sofie, had to leave us due to new laws. I don't know when Mux started with it, but I know that she found a Catholic priest to be an important support who became her confidant.

To remain somewhat chronologically correct, I look again and again in the book by Ploetz "Excerpt from History" while I write. The time period 1942-1944 is titled "The Time of German Defeats". One cannot better name the environment in which we now lived.


30. Total War (1944)

I have titled this chapter "Total War". In fact, the speech by Reich Propaganda Minister Goebbels, in which he asked the question about total war with a voice rising to a crescendo, had already taken place in February 1943. I own a long-playing record that contains this excerpt from his speech in the Berlin Sportpalast. One must listen to it once to get not only the words but also the atmosphere. It sends chills down one's spine. Here only the words can be reproduced. Goebbels shouted: "Do you want total war!!?" and thousands of people shouted back: "Yesss!!". And Goebbels shouted further: "Do you want it, if necessary, more total and radical than we can even imagine?!!" And again a roar answered: "Yesss!!"

And that's what it came to. In the war zone, there were masses of dead in the retreat battles; almost every night, and often during the day as well, bombs rained down on German cities, causing devastation and killing tens of thousands of civilians; on the world's oceans, German U-boats had only a slim chance of returning to their home ports since the invention of radar.

And at home - I deliberately use this slogan that was constantly used at the time, because it drastically illustrates the difference to the theaters of war - everything was more and more totally geared towards the war, even when no bombs were falling. First, there were the nightly air raid alarms, which interrupted sleep almost everywhere, because air raid alarms were always given when planes were approaching, regardless of whether they only flew over the place or actually dropped their bombs. Alarm meant you had to get up and hurry to the cellar. My parents and I preferred the "splinter trench" in the garden, which we had dug, because we feared being buried in the cellar in case of a bomb hit. Freiburg had not been bombed until now, but there was an alarm almost every night. Even if you didn't get up, which often happened due to getting used to the alarms, you stayed awake with a somewhat uneasy feeling. Maybe bombs would fall after all, and then what? Due to lack of sleep, irritability had spread almost everywhere.

In the factory, the work was increasingly done by conscripted housewives. I had meanwhile completed my apprenticeship, but for known reasons had not been admitted to the journeyman's examination. After all, I had developed into a reasonably proficient precision mechanic and had a lot to do instructing and supervising the housewives in their work, because shoddy work was severely criticized. The factory produced instruments for warfare, and strict control over qualitative suitability was the order of the day. The men were assigned to night fire watches in addition to their daily work. I too spent numerous nights in the factory, without an attack on Freiburg taking place. The daily working hours had been extended and lasted into the late evening. In addition, we worked in shifts, always alternating between day shift and night shift. This was an unfortunate solution, because you couldn't get used to a rhythm. From 3 o'clock at night, the eyes became heavy and heavier. Daytime sleep was hardly possible anyway. I don't remember when the free Sundays were cancelled, but something like that was eventually due.

In the family, it first hit Aunt Anna and Uncle Eugen, who were totally bombed out in Frankfurt, lost all their possessions, but survived and moved to Bad Homburg. Unfortunately, there is no record of when that was, maybe as early as 1943. Uncle Eugen died shortly after. He had been suffering from angina pectoris for a long time before. - On March 22, Aunt Gretel fell victim to a bomb attack. The Berndt house had been hit; Uncle Erich and Dieter survived. Aunt Gretel had already suffered a true martyrdom before. For years she had been ailing, but the origin could never be diagnosed, until finally her appendix was removed. From then on she felt much better, but she couldn't enjoy her health, because soon she received the order to work in a munitions factory. And shortly after, she was killed by an American bomb. That's when the madness of this war was pushed to the extreme: a Jew, hoping for an end to the war and Nazi terror, is killed by those who were in the process of ending Nazi terror for her. At this time, Cousin Rolf was no longer in Germany. One day he had swum across the Rhine at night and was interned in Switzerland.

In Freiburg, things continued as before for us. From my perspective, there was a short vacation to note during this time, which is still very vivid in my memory. I spent it in a hotel in Titisee. It was depressing. I sat as a young and healthy man in the dining room at a table, critically eyed by the other guests, who were either very old or black-clad women, some with equally black-clad daughters. I could have passed for a soldier on leave, but any conversation about it would have very quickly been in danger of becoming extremely unpleasant. So I kept to myself and separate and marched during the day either left or right around Lake Titisee.

The train ride to Titisee was short, but it proceeded as typically as others before or after. Military police, called the "chain dogs", combed the trains for deserters, spies, escaped prisoners of war, and every male was strictly controlled. How I trembled each time, fearing something about my personal situation might come out. It would have meant immediate transfer to the Organization Todt, called OT. The OT combined serious criminals, deserters, and half-Jews to perform life-threatening work, such as recovering unexploded bombs after air raids or searching for land mines in mined front areas. However, I was able to survive all controls unscathed, because I had not only my red u.k. certificate but also my military pass, in which I was - falsely! - registered as "k.v." (see also chapters 27 and 28). The actually applicable "n.z.V." would have meant the OT for me. The military police leafed through my papers, looked at themselves and me uncomprehendingly, shook their heads and remarked to me: "Well, you'll soon be in it too." From their point of view, it couldn't be otherwise than that I was a specialist for the production of war equipment, which, apart from the position "specialist", corresponded a little to the facts, because what I did in the factory could have been done by any average precision mechanic.

In June, the Allies landed on the Atlantic coast of France and overcame the heavily fortified German positions. This set the course for an advance all the way to Germany, an end to the war now seemed foreseeable and in the form of a defeat. For most Germans, this must have been an unimaginable thought after the enormous losses, but for our family, a glimmer of hope emerged. The question remained, however, how long did we still have to wait. And: would we even be able to experience it? From now on, listening to foreign radio stations had become an evening must, always accompanied by the anxious question of how quickly the advance was progressing. And we had to resignedly note that it was only moving forward slowly. The German troops in Russia were also constantly retreating, here also initially slowly and after heavy fighting, then faster. The ring around Germany was getting tighter.

In the factory, the foreign workers were of course just as excited. I had found a friend among them, Paul Grabbe from Oudelem in Belgium. Paul was reliable. We exchanged our latest radio reports in the toilet, of course only when we were sure that no one else was sitting somewhere and could hear us.

Then something unbelievable happened. It was July 20, one day before Mux's birthday. At first it was just a rumor, then the news came on the radio. An assassination attempt had been made on Hitler. There had been deaths and injuries, but Hitler had survived, although the bomb had exploded very close to him. The radio reports were overwhelming. At first, it seemed as if the coup of some military officers could be successful despite the failed assassination. But then this dream was also over. Hitler and Goebbels spoke on the radio. The first of the officers involved in the assassination attempt were shot, and the hunt for the circle of conspirators began. A success of the assassination would probably have saved hundreds of thousands of human lives. But it had failed, and thus the prerequisite had now been created for an even more brutal approach against anyone who did not act and speak in the sense of the Nazi regime. The phrase "sworn community" became the motto, and this in an environment where more and more people began to think that it might be better if this cruel affliction would end even through a defeat.

For Freiburg, it came very thick in November. The city became the target of a heavy air raid. At noon we had an air raid alarm and saw hundreds of planes flying directly over the city without a bomb falling. Nothing happened, and it was clear to us that Freiburg would never be attacked from the air.

But around 7 pm it finally happened. The sirens howled, but it was only a pre-alarm, which meant that planes were approaching. We were little concerned about this, because we were sure that nothing would happen to Freiburg. And then suddenly the bombs fell and the sirens howled, much too late. The sky was brightly lit by the marker lights dropped by the planes, called "Christmas trees", and the first impacts could be heard. We raced to our splinter trench. In doing so, I made a strange action. Halfway to the trench, I realized that I was only wearing light shoes. So back to the house to put on boots, regardless of the danger of bomb hits. I simply felt better equipped in boots for all the tasks that might still lie ahead of me that night.

We then crouched in the trench full of fear and prayed. Freiburg was about 75% destroyed during the attack. We outside were spared, but we felt the hail of bombs. The earth shook and the crashing of the impacts made us tremble. The next series could have rained down on us, and whenever the impacts came closer, we held our breath. We could only guess what inferno was playing out in the city, but the extent proved to be even much more terrible than one thought one should assume.

And then the attack was over. A dense cloud of smoke lay over the city, which only cleared days later. There was no all-clear, because the lines were of course destroyed, but you could tell that no more bombs were falling. Soon the first refugees appeared at our place. They had fled from the city with the aim of reaching the forest. Just out of the chaos, because it could well be that this first attack would be followed by a second, without being prepared for it due to lack of sirens. And then they had knocked on the door of one of the last houses before the edge of the forest. That was us.

When the attack was over and we had survived, the first thought was where can one help and how. Kromse went with the destination Pu Thüna, I took our ladder wagon and set off towards the factory, because we were obliged to report there after an attack. When I arrived there, I saw flames shooting out of the floors where the workshops were. To intervene here seemed to me to be beyond my possibilities, and so I went on to the house nearby where a Saarbrücken student who worked in the factory lived together with her sister in a room. There I appeared at the right time. The two Keßler sisters were standing with few saved belongings in front of a burning house. We loaded the wagon and returned home together.

There, the number of refugees had further increased. Some people had been bombed out and had lost their homes and possessions, some had simply turned their backs on the city full of horror. Eventually, over 90 people had found refuge in our house. Not only every room, but every space was occupied, the front hall, the wardrobe, the cellar, everything. In the laundry room lived a man who had lost his entire family. Werner Gülden had also arrived, because the barracks were in ruins. Gerd was no longer in Freiburg at this time. He had had to break off his studies and had been transferred to the front.

I don't remember anymore how we managed in the following days, but somehow it worked out. Water was fetched from a well 5 minutes away. Cooking was done on an emergency stove that we had erected in the garden from stacked bricks, and we had a stock of candles anyway, because even before, electricity had often been cut off because savings had to be made.

I had to go to the factory daily. There had been no bomb damage, but the effects of the fire were total. It was terrible to learn that the accommodation of our foreign workers had been razed to the ground by direct hits. Most of the French and Belgians had found death, such an absurd connection: English bombs on people who had been deported by the Germans!

For us, there was now nothing else to do but clean-up work. However, there was no thought of resuming production. We waited for things to come. More could not be done. One was numbed and acted only mechanically, just the next hour or the next day in mind. The authorities had their hands full just to restore some semblance of order in the city. For those who know Freiburg, I would like to give just one example to characterize the destruction. Kaiser-Josef-Strasse - then Adolf-Hitler-Strasse - was and is the main street in the center. It had become a trampled path through collapsed houses and rubble, on which two people could barely pass each other.

The days passed with clean-up work until December. In mid-December, it became known that a group of workers from the Freiburg factory would be transferred to a factory in Saxony. This factory produced the same war-important instruments as we did in Freiburg, and the Freiburg workers were now to help there, since production was no longer possible at home. I belonged to this group and Paul Grabbe as well, along with two foremen and a few others. For Paul and me, it was important to stay together. But now it meant saying goodbye to my parents, without the certainty of seeing each other again.


31. The Last Months Until the End of the War - Exciting and Turbulent

On New Year's Eve of 1944, we set off, with a destination, but still into the unknown. The destination was Meissen on the Elbe, the city of famous porcelain near Dresden. On the way to Meissen, the train passed through the station of Oschatz. I would have loved to get off to visit Wendi, who was training new pilots here as a flight instructor. But of course I couldn't leave the train. I wouldn't have had any success anyway, because Wendi was sitting in the "brig" at the time, as the military prison was called. He had expressed to his flight students that it all made no sense anymore, because the war was lost. This was reported and Wendi was demoted and imprisoned.

In Meissen, the Mesco company, a fairly large factory, awaited us. But before we were instructed in the work, we first had to take up quarters. I received a room in the old town with an outhouse in the stairwell. The way from there to the factory led over an Elbe bridge. This was constantly guarded by the military, because sabotage acts by spies were feared at such important bridges. Almost every day, a military patrol checked all the people crossing the bridge. This always brought anxious minutes, but everything went smoothly.

We Freiburgers were in Saxony for the first time. Here, many things were quite different from home and above all, the Nazi obedience was strongly pronounced. Everywhere people greeted with "Heil Hitler!", whether you entered a shop or came to work. We found the nature of the Saxons somewhat strange to us, at least unusual. Therefore, there was little communication with the work colleagues. For their part, they also looked at us somewhat astonished, a bit like from another planet.

Meissen had so far been spared the air war, Dresden as well. When we told about Freiburg, the attack and the destruction, we were met with a smile. They didn't believe us, and we even ran the risk of being seen as defeatists, as "naysayers and critics" (those were the official terms), and that was not without danger. This changed, however, after the air raid on Dresden, which proved to be the worst that a German city experienced in the war. Many of our work colleagues had to go to Dresden for clean-up work. They came back pale and horrified. This considerably depressed their mood, which before had still been so strongly characterized by the will to persevere and the belief in the imminent use of tremendously effective German secret weapons that could have turned the tide of the war at the last minute. Something like that would have been necessary, because by now the Allied forces were just short of the German borders, in the east as well as in the west. Streams of refugees fleeing from the Russians rolled over the roads, past Meissen too, and made a pitiful impression. It was a macabre end time.

For me, it also brought new excitement. The rooms in which we had found accommodation in Meissen proved to be only temporary sleeping quarters. In total, I had to move five times. That in itself would not have been anything special, because we were only traveling with small luggage. But the matter had a very personal hook for me. With every room change, we had to deregister and re-register with the police. To complete the formalities, one got special forms in the stationery shops. The first re-registration went smoothly. I had no difficulty answering the questions asked. But the second room change caused a shock. I had gotten forms again and noticed when filling them out that new questions had been added. It was apparently a version that had been adapted to the necessities of the Nazi regime. I found the question "Are you of Jewish descent?" and saw myself placed in a deep moral dilemma. The dilemma: with an honest answer, I would have been immediately assigned to the OT and sent towards the Eastern Front to perform life-threatening work that they didn't want to impose on the soldiers. With a dishonest answer, concentration camp would have threatened if the lie had come out, which was somewhat likely. So what to do?

I had day shift and Paul night shift. So I waited for him at the factory gate and asked him to check all the paper shops in Meissen and get as many forms of the old version as he could. I needed a large number, because 5 copies were required for each re-registration. Paul knew my situation and was of course immediately ready to help me, which meant that he had to give up his day sleep. He completed his task with good success and by the evening brought together a considerable amount of the old version. The precaution proved necessary, because there were more moves afterwards, and the forms were just enough. I was extremely relieved to have circumnavigated this one cliff. There were still enough others.

In February, a courier from our group had to go to Freiburg. I spoke with our foreman and expressed the wish to be appointed for this. There was an inner unrest in me, what was going on at home, what about Mux? And indeed, I received the order to travel.

Traveling, that was not comparable to what is meant by it today. The cities were bombed and with them many train stations and track systems. The locomotives could only be repaired and maintained to a limited extent. "Wheels must roll for victory!" was painted on them, a farce. Only those who could show an officially confirmed travel permit were allowed to travel. And of course there were no timetables, just as there were no connecting services. Every journey was an adventure that could also end fatally if the train got caught in a hail of bombs.

I set off for the station with a backpack in which I had packed a few things, bread and artificial honey, and began the journey into the unknown. It became quite a laborious trip. It took me two days to get to Freiburg. In between, I slept in the descent of some station, I think it was Ansbach, ate bread with artificial honey and finally arrived in Freiburg sticky from the artificial honey and dirty due to lack of washing facilities. During the journey, I of course had to endure numerous military controls and had plenty of fear. But my papers proved to be watertight.

At home, two pieces of news awaited me. The first was that Mux had received the order to be taken to Theresienstadt in a collective transport. The second, that some bombs had fallen around our house, causing numerous cracks in the masonry and damaging some furniture. Kromse had been thrown to the ground by the air pressure but remained uninjured.

When Mux received the order, a process was set in motion that the parents had previously prepared and discussed with two professors who were friends of theirs. Professors v. Braunbehrens (radiologist) and Behringer (psychiatrist) certified in writing that Mux had to be immediately admitted to the psychiatric clinic due to a brain tumor, which then happened. Kromse went with this certificate to the collection point, where this was of course doubted. But Kromse was able to assert himself and apparently did so with considerable loudness when he shouted at the party people "If you don't believe me, interrogate the professors under oath!". That was high-stakes poker, but successful. It certainly also played a role that at that time in Freiburg after the attack, everything was in turmoil and the authorities had other worries than to deal with such an individual case. So Mux was for the time being safe in the psychiatric clinic. She was really behind bars there, because around her lived mentally disturbed people. One must imagine that quite vividly! And there's something else to consider: The two professors risked their own lives with their faked certificate. If the deception had been discovered - and this risk certainly existed - they would have faced the death penalty. To protect a Jew from the concentration camp, that was a crime worthy of death. The friendship service of the professors cannot be valued highly enough. How highly a friendship was to be valued is also evident from yet another offer to help Mux if necessary. Gerd Dörner's parents, who didn't know my parents at all, but of course knew about us and our close connection to Gerd, had offered to take Mux to their home in Meschede in the Sauerland if danger threatened.

My assignment at the factory was quickly completed. But I wanted more. I absolutely wanted to take official travel permits for all Freiburgers working in Meissen to secure our return. The Freiburg plant manager initially resisted this request, but finally I was able to change his mind. With blank travel permits, i.e. without a date, I started the return journey. Now we could determine ourselves in Meissen when we wanted to finish there.

The journey back was extremely exciting. The chaos had intensified further. In some places, there were no connections at all due to destroyed track systems. You had to get off and walk to the next boarding possibility. This was the case in Ulm, for example. We marched for kilometers at night with bag and baggage, across rows of destroyed houses that were still smoldering. A macabre sight and an eerie feeling. One also had to reckon with attacks by starving foreign workers or escaped prisoners of war. For safety reasons, Kromse had given me a small revolver and ammunition, which I was to use in case of emergency. I held it tightly clenched during the march. But would I have been able to shoot? I doubt it.

But the most exciting thing came a short time later. We had reached the train connection and also found seats. Everyone was brooding dully or sleeping. But I urgently needed to go to the toilet. There was no thought of that on the train. So I marked my seat with my backpack, got out, went to a neighboring plot of rubble and sat down on a beam there. The thick wallet I was carrying in my back pocket was disturbing. It contained all my papers that had always saved me during military controls, and it also contained the blank travel permits for the Freiburg group. I took the wallet out of my pants and put it next to me on the beam. Suddenly I heard the whistle of the train, which was about to depart with all my luggage. So quickly pull up my pants and hurry there. In the compartment I discovered the loss of the wallet. My heart almost stopped. Nothing but out again and to the beam! There the wallet lay peacefully. Back to the train, which I just barely reached. - In retrospect, it has proven that at least I would certainly not have survived the war without the papers in the wallet, the others in the group perhaps not either.

Meanwhile in Meissen, an end mood had set in. The Allied troops had reached German territory, in the west as well as in the east. And the front in the east was slowly but surely moving towards Meissen. Among us Freiburgers, the desire grew to date the travel permits and use them. Our foreman, however, who was still the most infected by the Nazi bacillus, resisted and suddenly seemed to have ambitions to personally stand against the Russians with weapons at the last moment. This would drag us in with him, and so our pressure against him grew. When rumors were heard that the factory staff would soon be incorporated into the Volkssturm and used as the last bulwark against the Russians, the foreman's courage also waned, and he agreed to prepare our departure. In the last days of March, we set off without notifying the factory management.

The last journey turned out to be quite complicated in terms of route, because the Americans had meanwhile advanced far into Germany. We had to take a wide detour that finally brought us via Ingolstadt to Donaueschingen in the Black Forest. There it was over for the time being. A train to Freiburg would go, but nobody knew when. But I didn't want to wait for that anymore. Everything simply drove me home. And so I stood by the road to find any ride. In doing so, I accepted that it was not without danger to use the road, because firstly, Allied planes hunted unhindered everything that moved on the roads, and secondly, of course, military patrols were everywhere. Both also threatened the trains, but with a lower risk.

A truck took me along. It was driven by a wood gasifier system, because gasoline or diesel oil was only available for the military, and even this often remained unsupplied towards the end of the war. Wood gasification meant that wood and charcoal had to be constantly added to the large boiler behind the driver's cab and kept glowing with a poker so that the engine was supplied with enough wood gas. This meant stopping again and again. This should not happen on inclines if possible, because the energy generated from wood gasification was much less than that from gasoline or diesel. I describe this in such detail because no one who hasn't experienced it themselves can imagine it. On the two fenders of the truck sat lookouts who constantly had to be on the alert for approaching fighter planes. If that was the case, we had to stop immediately and take cover. Without incident, we reached Freiburg. I jumped off and hurried to Wintererstrasse. Kromse was not at home, but I quickly found him two houses away, where he was sitting with Konstantin von Bayern discussing the impending end of the war. It was around noon on April 1, 1945.

Now I was back home and had survived all the dangers of the last months. Unthinkable what would have happened if the train had departed then without me noticing the loss of the wallet. Even today, a shiver runs down my spine at this thought. These minutes are among the most decisive moments of my life. I will never forget them. Near Meissen, as it turned out later, fighting continued until the very last hour of the war, when it had long been over for Freiburg. We would have been stuck there in the middle of the end-battle mess.

Mux was still in the clinic and thus safe, albeit under circumstances that must have depressed her very much. Kromse spent a lot of time with Konstantin von Bayern, who as a descendant of a formerly ruling royal house had not been drafted into the military. This sounds incomprehensible, but it was a fact and explicable by the Nazis wanting to prevent a descendant of such a royal house who fell in the war from being revered as a martyr in the population and thereby creating the danger of a resurgent monarchy. In fact, such signs had been felt when the exemption of this circle was not yet valid and a Hohenzollern son fell. Thereupon the new regulation was issued, and Konstantin did not have to join the military.

I had reported back to the factory, where people were still passing the time with clean-up work, better: killing time, because there was no thought of resuming production. We were then also deployed elsewhere, such as digging "tank trenches" that were supposed to stop the advance of the French. We rode bicycles to the Kaiserstuhl and occupied ourselves with spades and shovels, of course without any enthusiasm and without much effort. The French tanks would have laughed themselves silly at such obstacles. But it didn't come to that, because they advanced from another direction.

There was still an exciting experience when a plane was shot down over Freiburg. The crew saved themselves with parachutes and slowly floated to the ground. Then shooting began from all sides at these targets. The anger of the population over the attack was venting itself. A parachute landed very close to me. With a drawn pistol, a party functionary ran towards it and waved wildly with the weapon. I almost became witness to an execution, but before the functionary could pull the trigger, a soldier very calmly took the pistol from him, didn't engage in any discussion, and brought the prisoner to safety.

Once again, Kromse spoke a word of power. It was said that the workers of the factory would be transferred to a place in the Black Forest to resume production there. Then Kromse went to the plant manager and said: "If anything happens to my son, I will make sure that you hang from the next lantern as soon as the French are here!" With the result that I did not have to go along to the Black Forest.

The front came ever closer. On April 19, artillery fire could be heard, the French were just outside Freiburg. The German troops were retreating, partly past our house. However, one group did stop. The soldiers thought a bush in our garden would be a suitable resistance nest against enemy tanks. They carried appropriate weapons with them. Kromse went to them and could actually convince them that their plan was quite senseless. Thereupon they left.

On April 20, it finally happened. The French marched into Freiburg without a shot being fired. The Nazi era was over and no more threat to be endured. Life and limb were saved. And we were very eager to see when we would get our first glimpse of a Frenchman. That lasted until April 21 or 22. Then two Moroccans stood in front of our front door and demanded quarters. Kromse addressed them in French. He was born in Lorraine and spoke the language fluently. This made a tremendous impression on the Moroccans. Kromse said they could of course have quarters, and even showed them the room. But he added that he expected a written assignment from an officer. That worked. They left and didn't come back.

A few days later, when people had realized that it was really all over now, Mux also returned. We were all together again, almost unimaginable!

But the war was not yet over. Freiburg was only a small, an insignificant intermediate station. Although everything was in dissolution, and the Allied troops occupied more and more of the German Reich territory, fighting continued with the deployment of adolescent children and old men. Only when the Russians were in the process of taking Berlin under heavy fighting, Hitler and Goebbels committed suicide on April 30. On May 9, it was really all over. Germany had capitulated unconditionally. "Unconditionally", that still had many aftereffects.


32. Finale

So we were all together again, happily reunited. Happy ending? All's well that ends well? Yes and no. Initially, of course, yes! We had all survived. We could now breathe freely, if the doorbell rang, it was certainly no longer the Gestapo. When we talked, we didn't have to turn around first to see if perhaps a spy was lurking. There were no more air raid alarms and falling bombs. We weren't like many Germans who lamented that their fatherland had lost the war.

But then also no. The wounds inflicted on our inner selves, our souls during this time, healed only slowly and with difficulty. And when they seemed to have healed, they suddenly broke open again due to some incident. Or the scars that had formed hurt. This pain returned again and again for decades, it had permanently nested. I myself had difficulty regaining and stabilizing some of my self-esteem. The thorn of having been downgraded to second-class status and humiliated is still present today. After the war, the idea of getting help through therapy couldn't even arise. Such a thing didn't exist in Germany and was still unknown decades later. Probably my refusal to take risks, and perhaps the exaggerated effort to secure myself - and later my family - can be traced back to the time of Nazi oppression.

But that doesn't mean that we didn't start to really live now that the horror was over. The environment didn't make it easy for us - as for all other Germans. The capitulation had been unconditional. The state of South Baden belonged to the French occupation zone. France had suffered bitterly under German occupation during the war, and even after the war, the French, whose country the war had passed over, were materially quite badly off. This was very noticeable in the French occupation zone. Those who belonged to the circle of people persecuted by the Nazis, and that's what we were, enjoyed certain advantages. As an example, when I was caught by a French gendarme riding a bicycle without a light in the dark, I could only save myself from the certain threat of being beaten up by showing my ID as a politically persecuted person. The gendarme saluted and let me go. But in the food allocation, we had no advantages at all, and there was very, very little to eat. Kromse suffered the worst from this, becoming terribly emaciated.

I soon ended my precision mechanic existence and tried to get a place at university. The university was largely destroyed. We prospective students helped with the clean-up and construction work. In the winter semester of 1945, the first lectures were given in the only existing lecture hall. We sat on the benches in winter coats and wrote our exams with gloves on. Because the room couldn't be heated. It creaked mightily as the little wheels in the brain began to turn again after more than 5 years of largely mental abstinence - since the Abitur.

An example should illustrate under what conditions one lived directly after the war. Of course, we wanted to establish contact with our Frankfurt relatives as soon as possible. There was no mail or telephone. So it was necessary to see things for oneself in person. I began the journey to Frankfurt early in the morning at 5 o'clock on the loading ramp of a truck (of course with a wood gas engine!) which took me near Offenburg. From there I could travel a certain distance by train, of course only hours after the truck had dropped me off. By evening I had reached Karlsruhe and spent the night in the station bunker. In the morning, one had to pay attention at the station to conclude from rumors when and where things would continue. So I finally landed in Frankfurt. For this route, which one covers today in about 2 1/2 hours, I needed almost 2 days.

I want to "philosophize" a bit in conclusion. I have hinted at what the Nazi era has left me in terms of negative effects. But I have always tried - and not for self-protection, but in honest recognition of the connections - to give priority to the positive. The following can be said about this. Without my personal situation, I would have been drafted into the military in 1941. The draft order to a bicycle company, which I already had, was only withdrawn after reviewing my situation. Would I have survived the war as a soldier? The probability for this is low. The year 1922 has been severely decimated. At the very least, I would hardly have been spared a severe injury and could have lost an arm, leg or eyesight. Moreover, I was spared from having to shoot at people, to kill people. And altogether, I was spared from getting into danger of becoming a Nazi and doing evil. The probability for this may not have been great, but it is by no means to be excluded.

Every fate has its good and its less good sides, and everyone is called upon to evaluate for themselves the remainder that is left after balancing good and less good. For me there is no doubt: Despite deep wounds and remaining scars, my special situation in the Nazi era created the conditions for me to stay alive and to continue this life in such a way that I felt love at the right moment to find the right woman for me and finally to land in a family that I love.

I started this report in November 1989. In mid-June 1992, I now come to the conclusion. 2 1/2 years, a long time. Why so long? I didn't sit continuously at it. I didn't "write a book", because otherwise I would have "worked" daily with fixed times. In contrast, I sat down from time to time and put something on paper, often with several weeks or even months in between. Only towards the end, when I had a temporal idea of finishing, did I sit for several hours in a row. Of course, I made notes about emerging memories in between, but I didn't, as historians do, create a card index beforehand and systematize my thoughts in keywords. This may excuse repetitions and also reports about this and that, where the reader might ask why I wrote it down. My answer to that: "Then it was important to me at that moment, for whatever reason." What I wrote down was a combination of gut and head, sometimes more of this, sometimes more of that. If I were to read it all again now, a revision would probably be in order, and the errors that are certainly most present would be eliminated, namely words that are capitalized instead of lowercase, or lowercase instead of capitalized. But I don't want all that. It should remain as it came.


33. A Topic All Its Own: "Who is a Jew?"

This question arises from the experiences and events during the Nazi era. It arises based on the racial theory that was then propagated and represented as definitive and correct, which later collapsed in on itself, because it has just as definitively proven to be false. They had emphasized "race" and spoke just as much of "Jewish blood". They tried to establish and prove both based on external characteristics.

The Nazi ideology claimed that the following physical characteristics applied to the Jewish race: small stature, large hooked nose, crooked legs, thick lips, to name the most essential. Certain skull measurements were also brought into this context. This would be a very significant difference from the "Nordic" characteristics. But this already faltered during the Nazi era, even if it couldn't be admitted, because it didn't apply at all to numerous Jews, such as Uncle Adolf, who was tall, slim and straight-grown and had a classically "Nordic" head to show. Moreover, one only needs to look at Israel, where the youth growing up in freedom looks anything but what it should look like according to Nazi theory. If European Jews are often small and show certain degenerative physical characteristics, it's because their ancestors had to live crammed into ghettos for many generations and there was certainly inbreeding there. As for the characteristics of crooked nose and thick lips, a look at a photo of Arafat proves that these are possible but certainly not compelling characteristics of people living in this region or once originating from this region, so not only Jews but Arabs as well. - And the theory of "Jewish blood" is complete nonsense. Blood is blood, no matter in which veins it flows. And the blood differences are based on completely different criteria than races.

That there can be no "Jewish race" is thus clarified. But: What is the characteristic of a race at all? Perhaps the skin colors white, black, yellow, red; one could come to terms with that. The term "race" appears, by the way, also in another context, when for example the Semitic race is spoken of. Here again the Jews are brought into play, and the term "anti-Semitism" is derived from this. If one follows this theory, one lands in the Bible, where in the Old Testament the ancestral father Noah, who survived the flood in the ark, had three sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth. Since all life had ended through the flood, after the flood new life began with the living beings that were in the ark, including the three Noah sons, with whom the new humanity was founded with three races. These would then be the Semites, the Hamites and the Japhethites. But to whom would these three races extend? Should one really follow this and develop a racial theory from it?! No, really not! But to those who want to see only the Jews represented under Semites, it should be said that then the Arabs must in any case be included.

So it can't be due to race. But who is a Jew now, or: what constitutes being Jewish? The simplest criterion is religion. That's always true. Anyone who belongs to the Jewish religious community is undoubtedly Jewish. This distinguishes him from Christians, Muslims, Buddhists and members of other religions. But what if the person in question does not profess the Jewish religion, as has been the case countless times over the centuries when Jews were baptized and became Christians or when, as in today's state of Israel, many people feel committed to no religion at all? Are then really all, even the non-religious Israelis also Jews? A provocative question! The Jewish religion makes it simple and says: Every child of a Jewish mother is a Jew. But this answer can't really satisfy, because these children can switch to any other religion or live without one. Are they still Jews then?

In the spring of 1992, there was an exhibition in Hamburg "400 Years of Jews in Hamburg". Among other things, there were guiding principles about Jewish life to read. Among them was one with the heading "Jewish self-awareness extends to 6 essential contents". I consider them important in order to get at least a small step further in the search for the answer to the question asked, and would therefore like to quote them here, and above all the postscript, which draws the conclusion from them. The 6 contents are named as:

1. The religion based on the Torah with the belief in one God;
2. The bond with the country of origin of the Jewish religion and the Jewish people, the Holy Land, Eretz Israel;
3. The maintained memory of the persecutions suffered again and again over several millennia, combined with the will to survive;
4. The cohesion of the Jewish communities scattered around the world and the solidarity practiced between their people;
5. The strong bond in the family and the cohesion up to its wide ramifications, basis for help in need and for business relationships;
6. The active participation in the life of the non-Jewish majority in the countries of the Jewish diaspora.

Postscript: Jew and Jewess are those who profess the Jewish religion and/or come from the community of Jewish people and share their fate as Jews.

So much for this text. These theses bring essential contents. They refer significantly to religion, but not only to it. Historical aspects play an important role, such as the persecutions suffered and the community of fate. But it seems that it doesn't work without the profession of the Jewish religion. Or does it? This last question remains open. Or is the question posed in this chapter not clearly answerable at all? There's much to suggest this.

In one respect, however, there is a clear answer. And that is the certainty that the racial or blood-based classification is wrong. And thus the classification into half-, quarter-, eighth- and whatever other -Jews becomes meaningless. Either someone is Jewish, or they are not. The fact that the question of who is a Jew has not yet found a clear answer plays no role in this context. But the charlatanry of classification according to fractions must finally stop. It greatly upsets me that one still hears and reads such things today, because it proves that the few years of the Nazi era - from 1933 to 1945, so only 12 years in total - have left deep traces especially here. Almost 50 years later, such nonsense can still be heard, and not only among members of the old generation, it is also present in the heads and thoughts of the younger ones. Has there been too little reflection on this or is it simply "only" made too easy? From "half- and quarter-Jew" it's only a very short way to racial theory. Therefore, it is necessary to remain vigilant against emerging neo-Nazi ideas.
